After a 19-year hiatus, the Tangerine Bowl is back. 
North Carolina State of the Atlantic Coast Conference and Pittsburgh of the Big East were chosen to participate in a bowl game that once was a fixture in Central Florida. 
Founded in 1946, the Tangerine Bowl was held in Orlando for 37 years before giving way to the Citrus Bowl. Boston College and Auburn played in the last Tangerine Bowl in 1982. 


its 11-year history. 

since it staged a remarkable rally of its own this season. 
The Panthers dropped to 1-5 following a 45-7 loss at Boston College on Oct. 20 and coach Walt Harris' job appeared to be in jeopardy. But Pittsburgh responded by winning its final five games, including a 38-7 rout of bowl-bound Virginia Tech on Nov. 3. 
Pittsburgh clinched its second straight bowl appearance with a 24-6 victory over Alabama-Birmingham on Dec. 1. The Panthers are making back-to-back bowl appearances for the first time since the Dan Marino days in the early 1980s. 
The turnaround can be attributed to an improved defense. During the winning streak, the Panthers are allowing an average of just over seven points per game. They gave up 42 and 45 points in back-back losses to Syracuse and Boston College. 
Quarterback David Priestley also has picked up his game, throwing 13 touchdown passes in the last five contests. He had only four TD tosses in his first five outings, missing one game with an injury. 
Pittsburgh posted its best finish since going 6-0-1 in its final seven games in 1983. 
Antonio Bryant endured an injury-plagued year and caught only 42 passes for 659 yards after leading the nation in receiving yards last season (130.0 ypg) and earning All-America honors. But he still tops the Panthers with nine touchdown passes. 
The highlight of North Carolina State's season was a 34-28 victory at Florida State in November as the Wolfpack became the first ACC team to win at Doak-Campbell Stadium. 
A week later, North Carolina State nearly upset ACC champion Maryland before falling, 23-19, on a last-minute touchdown. 
The Wolfpack also had a strong finish, winning four of their last five to earn a bowl invitation after splitting their first six games. 
Philip Rivers enjoyed a steady, if not spectacular, season for North Carolina State, passing for 2,586 yards with 16 touchdowns and seven interceptions. 
Clemson also was considered for this game before Wolfpack coach Chuck Amato interrupted a recruiting trip to visit Florida and plead his team's case.
North Carolina State and Pittsburgh also met in the 1978 Tangerine Bowl, with the Wolfpack posting a 30-17 victory.