What is the National Guard?
The National Guard is a state and federal military force with Army and Air Force troops in all 50 states and the District of Columbia, Guam, the Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico.
There are about 350,000 Army Guard soldiers in the United States and 108,000 Air Guard troops. By comparison, the active-duty Army has 480,000 soldiers and the Air Force has 357,000 airmen.
The majority of Guard troops are part-timers who drill one weekend a month and two weeks each year.
In its state role, the Guard falls under the command of each state's governor in peacetime and can be called up to respond to natural disasters and other emergencies.
The National Guard also has a federal role serving as a backup to the Army and Air Force. A large percentage of combat support jobs in the Army and Air Force are assigned to the National Guard, including military police, aerial refuelers, water purification units and numerous other specialists. The Guard also has combat units that include infantry, tank units and fighter jets.
The Army National Guard is separate from the U.S. Army Reserves, which is the active-duty Army's backup force and reports directly to the Army. The Army Reserves has about 208,000 soldiers.

The National Guard is the oldest component of the armed forces. The National Guard traces its roots to state militias set up 365 years ago during the colonial period.
The Guard has fought in every major war this century. The National Guard made up 40% of American combat divisions in France and National Guard units were among the first to deploy overseas during World War II.
Guard troops in the Persian Gulf War performed a variety of missions, from supporting combat soldiers to flying fighter jets.

In many hundreds of communities across the United States, the National Guard is the most visible U.S. military presence. There are National Guard armories in virtually every congressional district in the United States and in some towns three and four generations have served in the Guard.

There is a vast difference between the Army Guard and the Air Guard. For most of this century the Army Guard has had a rocky relationship with the active-duty Army.
The two forces have competed for federal funding and troops. In the past 5 years, the Army and National Guard have attempted to forge a much closer relationship.
The Air National Guard has cultivated a close relationship with the active-duty Air Force and is often seen by Air Force leaders as an equal player.
Air Guard fighter units are often filled with former Air Force pilots and mechanics and sometimes have more experience than their Air Force counterparts.