And yet the National Guard's commanding generals usually make more money than the governors who are their commanders-in-chief. In the case of Connecticut, the National Guard commander earns more than twice as much as the governor.
Welcome to the rarefied world of the adjutant general, the official name for America's 50 state National Guard leaders. Together, the size of the force they command is larger than the military of every country in NATO except Turkey. And they rule their state militaries with unrivaled autonomy.
"Becoming an adjutant general is like being coronated," says Maj. Gen. Paul Monroe, who commands the 20,000-member California National Guard, the nation's largest.
Soon after taking the adjutant general post in May 1999, Monroe made what he thought was an innocent remark about the carpeting in his office to several subordinate officers. The next day when he walked in, the carpet had been replaced. "You just can't believe how you are treated all of the sudden. It can really go to your head," Monroe says.
The nation's National Guard commanders are the most powerful yet anonymous military leaders in the nation. It's a safe bet that most people don't know the meaning of the title "adjutant general," let alone the name of their state's National Guard commander.
Adjutants general lead National Guard contingents in 50 states plus the District of Columbia, Guam, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands. Together, these two-star generals command an Army and Air Guard force of about 460,000 troops.
Few military commanders anywhere are compensated so well.
A review of adjutant general salaries by USA TODAY shows that 41 state Guard commanders earned more than their governors last year. Thirteen of them earned more than the nation's top active-duty general.
Gen. Hugh Shelton, then-chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, commanded 1.4 million regular troops and was paid about $132,100. Maj. Gen. William Cugno, the adjutant general of Connecticut, earned about $166,300 while commanding a force of 5,000.
Adjutants general aren't chosen the same way as active duty or Reserve military officers, who must rise through the ranks and compete nationally for promotions. In all but two of the 50 states, governors appoint their National Guard commanders. In South Carolina and Vermont, adjutants general are elected by the people and the Legislature, respectively.
Sometimes, the selections backfire.
In the past decade, adjutants general from at least nine states have committed offenses that include strong-arming subordinates for campaign contributions, using military aircraft for personal vacations, improperly retaliating against officers reporting misconduct and lying to federal investigators.
The litany of problems can be blamed partly on how state commanders are chosen, argues Buddy Stroud, the former adjutant general in Louisiana. Some adjutants general are appointed to the position without having climbed a career ladder that would properly prepare them for a top command and the perks that come with the job, Stroud says.
"All of the sudden, they have 10,000 soldiers and airmen, cars, airplanes you can go anywhere in the world you want," he says.
Stroud says that many adjutants general know that even if they violate military regulations they probably will stay in office until their terms are up. Instances in which governors have relieved their state Guard commanders are rare, Defense Department documents show. Of the nine top commanders who were found to have committed serious violations of military rules in the past decade, only one was removed from office by a governor. Two others were removed from office after the FBI or state criminal investigators uncovered corruption.
Sometimes even their own commanders-in-chief can't get rid of them.
In one little-noticed case a decade ago, an adjutant general who had been relieved of command by his governor tried to take back command of the Mississippi National Guard when the governor traveled out of state.
Gov. Ray Mabus demoted Adjutant General Jim Farmer in 1990. Mabus said Farmer had quietly bought a share in a convenience store venture near one of two gates to Camp Shelby, a military training facility south of Hattiesburg, Miss., and used his authority to close the other gate.
At the time of his investment, Farmer also had insider information about a planned expansion of the camp, which amounted to a conflict of interest, Mabus charged.
The power struggle wound up in federal court; Farmer never regained power, although he continued to draw a salary and wear his uniform. Mabus says he enlisted the help of National Guard headquarters in Washington to get rid of Farmer but was unable to remove him.
A federal judge reviewing the case later wrote that the dispute seemed "more at home in the plot of a class B movie about a fictional coup d'?tat in a third-world country than to present-day happenings in a sovereign state."
Farmer later used his clout to get revenge: He mobilized the state's 16,000 Guardsmen against Mabus in the 1991 election, and Mabus lost.