Federal health officials yesterday began urging Capitol Hill workers to take an as-yet unlicensed anthrax vaccine as part of a plan sparked by fears that deadly spores may be lurking in the employees' bodies and could erupt once antibiotic treatments end.
Two military anthrax experts met with about 70 staffers to outline the rationale for the unprecedented inoculation proposal, which could involve as many as 3,000 Senate and U.S. Postal Service employees in Washington, New York and New Jersey.
Health officials are anxious to begin the vaccinations as soon as possible because many of the 10,000 Hill staffers and postal workers who had been put on 60 days of antibiotics after the bioterrorism attacks this fall have begun finishing their courses. That means they could be at risk of falling ill soon if anthrax spores are lingering in their lungs and their immune systems have not been primed to respond.
Officials want vaccinations to begin this week after Health and Human Services Secretary Tommy G. Thompson approves the plan.
Health officials said they began briefing the Capitol Hill workers first because Hill officials specifically requested that they do so. They said they would be available to brief all employees who would be affected by the plan.
But the plan is already generating controversy and confusion. District health officials are unconvinced the vaccination is necessary, but at the same time, they are concerned that not enough vaccine may be available for everyone at risk. The vaccine itself is controversial because the company that makes it has had a long history of problems and has yet to receive final approval by the Food and Drug Administration.
"There are only 10,000 doses of the latest batch of vaccine -- and that is the lot that the Capitol Hill physician has requested," said Larry Siegel, Washington's deputy health director. "We have made it very clear that if it is released, we want access to the same lot." Siegel contested claims from federal officials that only 3,000 people were at high enough risk to need the vaccine.
"There's no science yet that will allow anybody to make a determination that any of the 3,500 people in Brentwood [postal facility] are at any lower risk than the people in the Daschle suite," he said. "If anybody is going to be offered vaccine, everybody should."
On Capitol Hill, a Senate aide said the 90-minute briefing was calm and informative. The group was told that "extensive studies" of the anthrax vaccine showed no serious side effects, although the three injections can be painful.
Lt. Col. John Grabenstein, head of the anthrax vaccine program at the Army surgeon general's office, said vaccinations of 524,000 military personnel had found only low risks such as sore arms, aches and fevers. Combining vaccine with antibiotics is the "best insurance" against developing anthrax, Grabenstein said.
The Senate staffers considered most at risk are those who worked in the sixth- and fifth-floor offices of Senate Majority Leader Thomas A. Daschle (D-S.D.), which received a letter laden with anthrax spores in October, and the adjoining fifth-floor office of Sen. Russell Feingold (D-Wis.), as well as other officials who visited there after the tainted letter was discovered, said Greg Martin, chief of infectious diseases at the National Naval Medical Center.
For congressional staffers who did not come in direct contact with the tainted letter, officials will offer the vaccine but not necessarily recommend it, Martin said yesterday.
The first Capitol Hill staffers exposed to anthrax spores are completing their allotted 60 days of treatment.
Postal workers considered most at risk are those who worked with the four employees who developed inhalational anthrax, those in buildings where tainted letters were opened and those with positive nasal swabs, officials said.
Postal spokeswoman Kristin Krathwohl said no decision about the vaccination plan had been made by the Postal Service or unions.
"It's an area that few of us know anything about," said Barry Burns, chief shop steward in the motor vehicle section of the Brentwood facility. "The only thing we can do is put our trust in [the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention]. We have very little trust of postal management and what the post office was telling us. As of yet, we have no reason to distrust CDC."
For months, health authorities have been publicly advising people exposed to anthrax to take only the two-month course of antibiotics to protect themselves from developing the life-threatening disease.
But at a meeting Saturday, officials disclosed that two weeks before the first letter arrived, senior government physicians on Capitol Hill had met with officials from the FBI, the CIA, the Justice Department and several other agencies to prepare for an anthrax emergency.
"We all agreed" that anthrax vaccinations combined with antibiotics would be the collective approach, said John Eisold, the physician for Capitol Hill.
But when the anthrax scare began Oct. 15 and thousands of workers in the Senate and at postal facilities were declared at risk, there was not enough vaccine available to immunize everyone.
"The ramifications of the actions that I would take on the Hill were far broader than I had originally anticipated," Eisold said.
The government doctors scuttled their plan, which would almost certainly have been criticized for giving vaccines preferentially to lawmakers and powerful people over mail carriers. So instead, only antibiotics were recommended for everybody.
About a month ago, the CDC quietly laid the foundation for a vaccination program by filing a request for an experimental program with the FDA -- a necessary step because the proposed vaccine had not passed all the agency's licensing requirements.
At the time, the CDC said the vaccine was being stockpiled for health officials who would have to respond to future bioterrorist attacks, and possibly for use in people for whom antibiotics did not work. The Defense Department subsequently released some vaccine stocks to the CDC, making it possible to inoculate about 3,000 people.
Over the last few weeks, decades of anthrax research on animals and a recently declassified Canadian study reminded doctors that taking people off antibiotics for 60 days could leave them defenseless afterward against anthrax spores that lay dormant in their lungs. When the medicine is stopped, the spores could germinate, producing disease. 
The vaccine has not received final FDA approval because the company that has an exclusive contract to make it for the military, BioPort Corp. of Lansing, Mich., has had a series of problems. As a result, the new inoculation plan is formally being classified as experimental.
The vaccine has been generating controversy for years because of its use by the military to protect soldiers against possible biological weapons. Some soldiers refused to get vaccinated, saying they were concerned about the vaccine's safety. But health officials maintain that the vaccine has been shown to be safe. The holdup with the FDA's final approval has been over BioPort's manufacturing facility, not the vaccine itself, officials said.
Staff writers Avram Goldstein, John Lancaster and Rick Weiss contributed to this report.