As many as 3,000 people who were exposed to anthrax-laced letters will be offered anthrax vaccine and 40 more days of antibiotics to kill any living spores still present in their bodies, Secretary of Health and Human Services Tommy Thompson said Tuesday.
The strategy is unprecedented. Vaccines are typically given before exposure to a disease to prevent illness, not afterward. The vaccine would be given in three doses over four weeks, Thompson said. He added that anyone who prefers to avoid vaccination may opt for additional antibiotics or stick to the initial recommended course of 60 days of antibiotics and close medical monitoring.
"We hope to begin vaccinating in the Senate as early as (today) or maybe the next day," Thompson said. Leaders of the postal workers union have asked for a week to educate their members about the potential benefits and risks of the vaccine, Thompson said. Postal workers may begin getting vaccine as early as next week.
The initial 60-day period ends this weekend. "We are concerned that the risk of infection for those who may have been heavily exposed may extend beyond 60 days, perhaps to as much as 90 days," D.A. Henderson, director of the HHS Office of Public Health Preparedness, said Saturday at a meeting to consider the proposal.
Although the anthrax vaccine is said to be safe, it is not fully licensed and will be given on an experimental basis, said Kathy Zoon of the Food and Drug Administration. Those vaccinated will be studied to determine the vaccine's post-exposure effectiveness.
The decision affects people who work in the Hart Senate Office Building, postal facilities in the Washington and New York metro areas and media offices in New York and Florida.
People at highest risk are those who were in the buildings where letters were opened, people who worked in buildings where people developed inhalation anthrax and those who were found to have inhaled heavy doses of spores. Previous studies have shown that animals given antibiotics and vaccine appear to survive better than animals given antibiotics alone.
Research out Tuesday underscores the value of offering vaccination to those exposed to anthrax. Test tube studies show that the bacteria can become resistant to two classes of antibiotics fluoroquinolones (including Cipro) and macrolides (such as erythromycin) after being exposed to low doses of the drugs for 21 days.
It is "quite possible the drugs being used today may not be effective after a prolonged period of time," said researcher Itzhak Brook of the Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute in Bethesda, Md.
No resistance to doxycycline was seen during the three-week study, though it's possible that resistance would develop after a longer exposure, Brook told the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy in Chicago. He emphasized that what occurs in a test tube may not be mirrored in the human body.
Brook endorses adding vaccine to the combination of drugs now recommended for reducing the risk of inhalation anthrax in people who were exposed.