The United States says it will take swift military action against any country harbouring Osama Bin Laden or other suspected terrorists. 
No specific countries were named in the warning, which was issued during a briefing at the Pentagon. U.S. Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz said any country considering opening its doors to Osama Bin Laden, or other members of terrorist organizations, would be taking a severe risk. 
"I just think any country in the world that would knowingly harbour bin Laden would be out of their minds. And I think they've seen what happened to the Taliban, and I think that's a pretty good lesson not to do that," he said. 
In spite of an intensive search there are no signs of bin Laden either inside or outside of Afghanistan. In the past it has been suggested he may try to seek refuge in countries such as Iraq or Somalia. 
Wolfowitz also raised the possibility that bin Laden may have been killed; buried in one of the caves hit by U.S. bombs. 
"I think it's possible he could be dead in the bottom of one of them," he told the press briefing. 
With the bombing diminishing due to a lack of targets on the ground attention is shifting to Afghanistan's future. Only four days remain until the new interim government takes charge, but there's still no agreement on a peacekeeping force. 
The United Nations and members of the new government agree foreign troops are needed, but they still haven't worked out the details. 
France, Germany and Britain are expected to play prominent roles in any deployment. 
Canadian troops are also expected to take part, but Prime Minister Jean Chr tien says he hasn't decided how many Canadian troops will be deployed, or when they will be on the ground. 
Other countries aren't waiting for a final agreement. Britain says it is going ahead with plans to deploy its troops as part of the multinational force. 
The British Ministry of Defence says it's planning on having an advance force of 200 troops on the ground in Kabul by Saturday.