Hamid Karzai, the designated head of the interim government that will take power in Afghanistan ( news - web sites ) Saturday, believes an international peace force is likely to arrive in Kabul before his government takes office.
He was asked by reporters on his arrival in Rome late on Monday for talks on Tuesday with the country's former king if he expected peacekeeping troops to arrive in the Afghan capital before Saturday, December 22, the day he is due to take power.
"Probably," Karzai replied. "I can't give you a date but I believe they will."
His words echoed a senior U.S. official in Kabul who had said advance troops from an international peace force would arrive in Kabul in time for the government to take office.
The details of the force's make-up have yet to be announced but Prime Minister Tony Blair ( news - web sites ) said in parliament earlier on Monday that Britain would contribute up to 1,500 troops to the peace force and was prepared in principle to lead it.
The force, to guard the peace in the capital city itself and possibly other locations, was a key part of the peace deal signed in Germany this month which paved the way for the new post-Taliban interim administration to take power.
But that agreement left the details out.
Since then, the Northern Alliance, which now controls the capital, has said it wants to see no more than 1,000 foreign troops, and with a tightly defined mandate, mainly to guard government meetings.
But countries expected to contribute troops have discussed a much larger force with a more robust mission.
During a stopover in London on Monday, Karzai, 46, said he felt "very confident."
"So far, things are going very well and let's hope for the best," he told reporters.
Karzai, who is expected to stay in Rome perhaps for two days, is due to meet the former king of Afghanistan Mohammad Zahir Shah early on Tuesday evening.
The 87-year-old ex-king has been living in exile in Rome since 1973 and is seen as a key player in trying to unite Afghans, at least symbolically.
Karzai met the former King's grandson Mostapha Zahir for 20 minutes on his arrival at Rome's international airport.
Karzai, 46, is also expected to hold talks with other members of the king's small group of relatives and advisers, including the former monarch's son Mir Wais Zahir. The six-month tenure in office of his interim government starts on Saturday.