Quarterback Donovan McNabb took his worst physical beating of the season in Sunday's 20-6 win over the Washington Redskins.
McNabb, who completed just 16 of 34 passes and had the first three-interception game of his career, took several good shots from Redskins defensive end Bruce Smith. He played the entire game, but suffered lower back spasms and a sprained wrist.
Neither of the injuries is expected to keep McNabb out of Saturday's game against the San Francisco 49ers.
Despite his poor statistics, coach Andy Reid seemed pleased with McNabb's performance in the come-from-behind win. McNabb threw two touchdown passes, including a 62-yard strike to wide receiver Todd Pinkston.
"I think we saw maturity there," Reid said. "He very easily could've hung his head after those three interceptions. But he maintained his composure and stayed aggressive."

"I can't believe there's a better safety in the game right now than Brian Dawkins." Eagles coach Andy Reid.
: C-minus Donovan McNabb completed just 16 of 34 passes and had the first three-interception game of his career. But he hit enough big passes to put up 20 points. Had two TD throws.
: D Eagles ground game sputtered again. They rushed for just 63 yards, and 25 of those came from the quarterback. Running back Duce Staley averaged just 2.4 yards per carry.
: A Brian Dawkins had two key interceptions that thwarted Redskins scoring opportunities. Eagles have given up just 11 touchdown passes in 13 games.
: C-minus Eagles continued to have problems stopping the run. Redskins rushed for 155 yards, including 111 by Stephen Davis..
: A-minus David Akers nailed two more field goals. That's 16 in a row for him. P Sean Landeta averaged 48.8 yards per attempt. Coverage units did a pretty good job against Eric Metcalf and Michael Bates.
: B-minus After talking about the importance of a balanced offense, Andy Reid has gone back to his pass-first philosophy, which resulted in just 11 first downs Sunday and 14 the week before.
Donovan McNabb took a pretty good beating in the game, even though he was sacked only twice. Suffered lower back spasms and a sprained wrist, but finished the game and will play Saturday against San Francisco. Look for him to cut down on the running this week though.
Donovan McNabb has 23 rushing attempts in the last three games, including seven Sunday (for 25 yards) against Washington. McNabb's scrambling is causing him to take a beating though. He suffered lower back spasms and a sprained wrist Sunday.
Todd Pinkston had his first touchdown catch since the fourth game of the season. Caught a 62-yard scoring pass from Donovan McNabb. Pinkston has just 18 receptions in the last eight games after catching 19 in the first five.
Duce Staley continues to be most effective as a pass-receiver rather than a rusher. He had a club-high eight catches for 73 yards Sunday. Averaged just 2.4 yards per carry on the ground.
Chad Lewis had just one reception Sunday. Lewis, who led the team in receptions last season, has just 10 catches in the last six games.