Charles Prestwood, an Enron retiree whose $1.3 million in savings vanished with the energy firm's collapse, described his experience this way: "It was rags to riches and back to rags." Prestwood was one of five who gave emotional testimony before a Senate committee Tuesday about how they suffered in Enron's collapse. Four weren't able to sell any stock during the crucial four-week period after the Securities and Exchange Commission announced a probe into Enron, sending its stock from $25 to less than $5. Enron filed for bankruptcy protection Dec. 2. Tuesday, its shares closed at 50 cents.
Janice Farmer retired last year from Enron with nearly $700,000 worth of stock. When she tried to sell on Oct. 22, she was told she could not because Enron had just changed retirement plan administrators.
"I can't begin to tell you how devastating that was," Farmer said. "Enron made all its employees responsible for their own retirement. At the most critical time, they denied us access to our own money."
Sen. Bill Nelson, D-Fla., said the lockdown coming just after the SEC news probably was no coincidence.
"We had no choice but to ride the stock into the ground," said Robert Vigil, 47, from Enron's Portland (Ore.) General Electric unit. "Our plan prohibited anyone under the age of 50 from selling stock."
The Senate hearing on the Enron collapse, like last week's House hearing, focused on the discrepancy between Enron's officers, who sold more than $1 billion in stock over the last three years, and rank-and-file workers, who were constantly encouraged to plow their savings into Enron stock.
Outrage about the plight of those employees and disbelief about how Enron could dupe its auditors is already fueling calls for action on Capitol Hill.
Sen. Barbara Boxer, D-Calif., said Enron might have broken the law by effectively forcing employees to hold stock during a period when many wanted to sell. Sen. Ron Wyden, D-Ore., said Enron and its auditor, Andersen Worldwide, might have violated the Financial Fraud Detection and Disclosure Act.
Enron CEO Kenneth Lay declined to appear for the second time in a week, promising to show up at the next Senate committee hearing, scheduled Feb. 4.
In his absence, Senators fired questions at C.E. Andrews, a managing partner at Andersen who oversaw the Enron audit. Wyden demanded to know whether any of Enron's unusual off-the-books arrangements raised suspicions at the accounting firm.
Andrews said that the firm passed judgment on the off-the-books arrangements in strict accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, but admitted the firm made an error in judgment in one case.
Enron restated its numbers to show it earned $586 million less than it reported the last three years. Andersen says it's responsible for 20% of that amount.