Most of the phantom troops, commonly called ghost soldiers, have stopped going to monthly Guard drills and are no longer being paid. They are kept on rosters for months, and sometimes years, while replacement troops are recruited or their official discharges are completed, according to government documents and interviews with more than 40 National Guardsmen.
Officials in many states create the phantom troops because of difficulties recruiting and keeping soldiers. They fear that the federal government will shift their understaffed units, and potentially millions of dollars, to states that can recruit enough troops to fill them.

Day-to-day control of the Guard rests at the state level, but 95% of its money about $13 billion last year comes from the federal government. The government does not lose money as a result of ghost soldiers because they are not counted for salary purposes.
By exaggerating staffing levels, Guard commanders make anemic units appear combat-ready in official reports to the Pentagon and to the National Guard Bureau in Washington, former Guard personnel officers say.
The General Accounting Office (GAO), Congress' watchdog agency, has been investigating ghost soldiers for a year but has yet to determine the extent of the problem.
The U.S. Defense Criminal Investigative Service recently completed a two-year investigation of ghost troops in Arizona. Its report has been turned over to the U.S. attorney for Arizona for possible criminal action, the investigation service says.
The investigators say that in Arizona, one of every eight soldier discharges took longer than 200 days to process. One former Guard soldier from Arizona says he was kept on the rolls for two years after leaving the Guard.
The problem with ghost soldiers is limited to the almost 350,000-member Army National Guard. The Air National Guard, which has 110,000 airmen, typically does not have ghost troops.
There is no indication that any of the Guard units called up since Sept. 11 have insufficient numbers of troops. In some cases, however, the mobilized units have been created from Guard soldiers pulled from several units.
interviewed current and former Army Guard troops who range in rank from sergeant to one-star general. They provided similar accounts of how Guard units inflate their reported troop numbers, often without consequence. Some spoke publicly despite fear of retribution.

California has the nation's largest National Guard force, with about 20,000 Army and Air Guard troops on the rolls. But several Army Guard soldiers say that number is misleading and padding troop numbers is a common practice. Sgt. 1st Class Tom Petry says his 200-man infantry company, mobilized to go to the Middle East in September, listed 70 soldiers on its roster who seldom if ever attended monthly drills. 
"I will stand in front of a congressional committee if I have to tell them about this," says Petry, who has been unable to perform his duties as a unit administrator since May because of chronic medical problems. He is due to be discharged early next year. He says the ghost soldiers were being carried on the books to make his infantry company appear combat-ready.
Guard officials in California deny Petry's allegation. They say their records show 50 unpaid soldiers in the 800-member battalion that Petry's company is part of. They also say that statewide, the number of unpaid soldiers is declining rapidly as a result of a new emphasis on discharging troops quickly.
Several other California Guard officers and enlisted men say the state has a history of inflating troop levels, however. Although not able to confirm Petry's charge, four other Guardsmen former Staff Sgt. Ed Green, former Staff Sgt. Rick Ortega, Maj. John Kanaley and retired Col. Bill Wenger say padding troop numbers is common.
Kanaley, a police officer in Long Beach, Calif., who left the Guard last month to transfer to the Army Reserve, says that when he was an officer in California's 40th Infantry Division from 1996 to 1998, up to 20% of his 800-man battalion were ghost soldiers.
Frequently, Kanaley says, soldiers who never showed up were marked on pay records as present, having made up the drills or were given excused absences even though they shouldn't have been.
"You feel like you're betraying the system talking about this, but sometimes these things need to be brought out," Kanaley says.
Kanaley says he believes the same practices continue today.
Maj. Gen. Paul Monroe, who took command of the California National Guard two years ago, acknowledges that 5% of the troops listed on statewide rosters exist only on paper. He did not comment on the number of ghost soldiers in individual units. Monroe says one of his biggest challenges is fixing a culture that tolerates officers filing misleading reports to make their units seem combat-ready. Monroe says he recently fired several senior officers because he didn't believe their troop reports. He also says ghost soldiers are a problem all across the Army National Guard.
In Illinois, state officials say that 3% to 5% of Army Guard troops statewide are being carried on the rolls as they await discharge. But Dave McGinnis, a retired colonel who helped National Guard headquarters develop methods to track ghost soldiers several years ago, reviewed personnel summaries from Illinois for USA TODAY and came to a different conclusion. 
McGinnis says that based on monthly averages for 2000 and 2001, nearly 20% of Illinois' 10,200 Army Guard troops are not regularly participating Guard members. They're either absent without leave, absent with an excuse or transferring to another unit.
Maj. Gen. David Harris, commander of the Illinois National Guard, says McGinnis' assessment is "preposterous and not in the realm of reality."
However, one week after Harris discounted McGinnis' assessment, Guard officials in Illinois and at National Guard headquarters in Washington called USA TODAY to acknowledge inadequacies with the troop numbers that Illinois had provided the newspaper.
Illinois officials said there were inaccuracies in the data because of "bad chartsmanship," and they said an unspecified number of troops who had previously left the Army Guard had not been removed from statewide troop rolls. They were unable to provide the percentage of ghost soldiers on their rosters.
Frank Jourige experienced the ghost soldier phenomenon personally. He left the Illinois Guard five years ago, but discovered last year that he was still on the rolls as a member of a transportation unit in Chicago. Jourige learned he was a ghost soldier after he got a letter from the federal government saying he owed four years' worth of payments on a Guard life insurance policy. He says his credit rating was nearly ruined because someone forged paperwork to keep him on the rolls even though he wasn't getting paid.
This year, after an internal investigation, state Guard officials told USA TODAY that Jourige's story is true. Jourige says Illinois investigators told him they had discovered four similar cases.
Larry Metcalf, who worked in the personnel section at Arizona Guard headquarters, says he saw stacks of discharge papers sitting for months. The soldiers, though no longer attending drills, were still counted on the state's rolls without pay, Metcalf says. 
After he left the Arizona Guard in January 1999, Metcalf says, he was carried for two years as an unpaid ghost soldier. At the time, the 3,800-member Arizona Army Guard was claiming "hundreds" more soldiers on the rolls than it had, he says.
Dean LeVay, a former Army Guard colonel in Arizona who is now a federal immigration judge, says that when he retired from the Guard in 1998, it was common for the state to inflate troop reports. LeVay says he doesn't know how many ghost soldiers there were, but he attended meetings at which senior officers bragged about how they prevented the state from losing units by manipulating discharges. "It shocked and angered me," LeVay says. He didn't report it, he says, because "I didn't think anybody would pay attention."
The Arizona National Guard denies loading its ranks with ghosts. Officials declined to be specific but said they have greatly reduced the number of unpaid soldiers on the rolls and have one of the lowest rates in the nation.
Guard officers from Texas, Maryland, Wyoming, Virginia and South Carolina say their states also have counted soldiers on the rolls after they have left the Guard for up to two years in some cases.
Two officers in South Carolina say that in 1999, state officials delayed discharging nearly 500 members of a 4,300-soldier combat infantry brigade. They say state commanders wanted the brigade to appear adequately staffed, even though nearly one in eight soldiers was a ghost. South Carolina Guard officials say the allegations are untrue. They acknowledge problems with backlogged discharges in 1999 but say they never had more than 200 in the combat brigade. Jeffrey Goldfarb, a former sergeant in the Wyoming Guard, says that from 1989 to 1996, ghost soldiers were common in his state. Goldfarb says 10 of the 65 soldiers in his headquarters company were phantoms. The problems continued after Goldfarb left. Two officers say an Army Inspector General investigation in 1999 found dozens of ghost soldiers on the state's rolls, including troops who had died. Wyoming officials, citing privacy concerns, declined to discuss the case. Bill Burkett, a former lieutenant colonel in the Texas National Guard, says that four years ago, he and a group of officers informed Adjutant General Danny James, the state commander, that 7% of the Texas Army Guard's 16,300 troops were ghost soldiers. Burkett and others say that despite promises to fix the problem, the Texas Army Guard continues to include soldiers who shouldn't be on the rolls. According to figures provided by the National Guard Bureau, over the past two years, Texas has had anywhere from 1,300 to 1,800 unpaid soldiers on its rolls, more than 11% at its peak. 
Asked about the number of unpaid soldiers on the rolls, James' office replied with a brief e-mail saying that 3.7% of Texas Army Guard troops are waiting to be discharged.

Each state recruits its own National Guard soldiers and is responsible for reporting troop levels monthly to the National Guard Bureau and quarterly to the Pentagon. Both the bureau in Washington and the Pentagon use the reports to keep track of how many soldiers each state has in each unit, so they know whether the units are at battle strength.
However, it's easy to pad those reports because most Guard troops are part-time soldiers who typically are required to show up for drills only one weekend a month and two weeks during the summer. If the soldiers don't show up, the Guard often keeps them on the records by classifying them in one of several categories of excused absences or by authorizing make-up drills.
A unit that can't fill 70% of its ranks is categorized at the bottom of a readiness scale as incapable of performing "most of its wartime missions." Certain kinds of units, such as infantry, may have more difficulty keeping their ranks full than other kinds. If a unit can't regularly fill at least 70% of its ranks, the Pentagon could transfer that unit's function and federal funding to a state that can.
Last year, the Guard Bureau took troops from Indiana and Massachusetts because of personnel shortfalls. Indiana lost 1,300 Army Guard soldiers and Massachusetts about 550.
A state's National Guard is funded each year based on a formula that counts how many soldiers are showing up for drills and being paid. The formula is designed so it does not reward states that pad their rolls with unpaid ghost soldiers. However, funding levels are not adjusted to reflect soldiers who leave the Guard after the money has been allocated.
If states get money for soldiers that aren't showing up for drills, they are allowed to use the money for training or other purposes.
The GAO is trying to determine how much money the Guard has received for troops it doesn't have.

Officials at the National Guard Bureau acknowledge the Guard had problems with inflated troop reports several years ago. But, they say, they have cracked down on the problem.
The Guard Bureau commander, Lt. Gen. Davis, says some states leave discharged soldiers on the rolls because they don't have enough clerks to do the paperwork.
In the late 1980s, officials at the bureau in Washington began developing databases designed to catch states that were harboring ghost soldiers. The databases use pay records from Guard drill attendance to count how many soldiers each state has.
Guard soldiers are paid based on the number of drills they attend. Those who miss more than three consecutive months of weekend drills without a valid excuse are typically supposed to be discharged.
The Guard Bureau developed a name for these unpaid soldiers: "No Vals," which stands for "no value." Guard Bureau personnel officials say they are confident their databases make it impossible for states to hide phantom troops.
But McGinnis, the former director of force management at National Guard headquarters who examined Illinois' troop data, says the National Guard is na?ve at best. He and others say some states have figured out how to hide ghost soldiers with administrative sleight of hand, by simply classifying troops in a temporary no-pay category such as excused leave.
That way they are counted as part of the unit but aren't paid. "Anytime you give them an opportunity, someone will figure out how to beat the system," McGinnis says.
McGinnis says he believes the number of ghosts in the Guard as a whole is double the 5% figure that Guard and Pentagon figures show.
Ed Green, a former staff sergeant in the California Guard, agrees with McGinnis that Guard commanders know how to beat the system.
When he left the California Guard in 1999, Green says commanders employed a variety of tricks to pad their rolls. One was to authorize soldiers absent from drills to show up at a later date to make up missed training, even when they knew they wouldn't.
Mark DePue, a former lieutenant colonel who retired from the Illinois Army Guard in April, says he discovered his state was issuing orders to discharge soldiers but was not deleting the soldiers' names from personnel databases. The practice greatly inflated the state's troop numbers, DePue says.
"The real harm is when units get called up, and ... we have given a grossly false picture," he says. "When we get to combat, and we are not ready, the unit pays the price, and the nation pays the price."