For the Baltimore Ravens, the significance of tonight's AFC Central Division showdown with the Pittsburgh Steelers at PSINet Stadium is straightforward. A victory would give them a chance at catching the Steelers for the division lead. A loss may well eliminate their slim hold on the AFC's top wild-card spot.
"It couldn't be better," Ravens Coach Brian Billick said. "Pittsburgh's the best team in the AFC right now. Home-field advantage [in the playoffs] riding on it. The whole nine yards."
The Steelers have a one-game lead over the Miami Dolphins of the AFC East and the Oakland Raiders of the AFC West in the race for home-field advantage throughout the conference playoffs. They have a two-game lead over the Ravens , and a victory tonight would give them their first division title in four years.
But the Ravens beat the Steelers six weeks ago, so winning this and their next three games coupled with another Pittsburgh loss would lift them to the division title. Both teams are similarly constructed, as each focuses on defense and running the football, and they expect to meet a third time in the postseason.
"It'll be a straight-up, punch-in-the-face, let's-go-at-it kind of game," Ravens defensive tackle Tony Siragusa promised.
Billick isn't totally convinced, based on some deception the Steelers have shown under new offensive coordinator Mike Mularkey.
"We will see," he suggested, "a fake field goal, a fake punt, an onsides kick, a double reverse pirouette, put it between your knees and shoot it out your mouth. You name it. Probably, [wide receiver] Hines Ward will be their leading ball carrier and 'The Bus' will be their leading passer. We'll be ready for it all."
The Steelers say "The Bus," aka 255-pound tailback Jerome Bettis, is unlikely to play because of a hip/groin injury that kept him out of their 18-7 victory over the New York Jets last week. If Bettis is sidelined, it will be the first time in his nine-year career that he would have missed back-to-back games.
"I'm looking at more than just" this game, Steelers Coach Bill Cowher said. "Certainly, if this was a playoff game and there was a chance of there being no tomorrow, we'd have to reevaluate that decision."
If Bettis does not play, Chris Fuamatu-Ma'afala will start and Amos Zereoue will have more playing time than usual to help counter the Ravens' speed. Without Bettis, the Steelers still rushed for 134 yards against the Jets.
One of the defensive stalwarts for the Ravens, tackle Sam Adams (knee), did not take part in the three rigorous practices this week but still was listed as questionable.
The Ravens have not permitted a 100-yard rusher in their last 49 games, although Bettis had 91 on 23 carries during the 13-10 Baltimore victory in Pittsburgh. That suggests the keys for the Steelers will be quarterback Kordell Stewart and place kicker Kris Brown, who missed four field goals in the earlier game.
Referring to Stewart's ability to run, Ravens middle linebacker Ray Lewis said, "He's a guy who literally puts the game in his hands."
The Ravens will offer another quarterback this time for the Steelers -- Elvis Grbac, who has been more consistent the last two games after four interceptions during a home loss to the Cleveland Browns. Backup Randall Cunningham replaced the injured Grbac in Pittsburgh and completed 14 of 22 passes for 158 yards and a touchdown. He was intercepted once.
"Their front seven is very good, and there aren't too many holes overall," Grbac said of the Steelers' defense. "But there are some things they do in certain formations with safeties that we can key on."