Fleischer's statement was the strongest to date by the Bush administration about who may be behind the attacks, and it contradicted earlier speculation that the anthrax was the work of foreign terrorists. An FBI profile describes the possible culprit as a male loner with a scientific background.
Fleischer declined to elaborate. "I can't give you the scientific reasons behind it, but you can assume that they're based on investigative and scientific means," he said.
His remarks came after revelations that the Army has manufactured powdered, or "weapons-grade," anthrax since the Persian Gulf War to test the effectiveness of its equipment against a biological attack. The Army said none of its anthrax is missing. The CIA, which also used anthrax to study biological warfare threats, has accounted for all of its anthrax, a spokesman said.
Investigators are focusing their hunt for the perpetrator on about 20 U.S. laboratories.

Despite hopes that an anthrax-laced letter sent to Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., could yield important clues, such as a fingerprint, preliminary tests have turned up no useful evidence, a senior law enforcement official said. 
Efforts continued to cleanse anthrax spores from the Hart Senate Office Building, which has been closed since Oct. 15. The building was pumped with chlorine dioxide for a second time on Monday to destroy spores that remained after the building was fumigated last month. Officials said they could not predict when the building, which contains offices for 50 senators, would reopen. At the State Department, the FBI was investigating a white powder found in an envelope addressed to Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage. 
Health and Human Services Secretary Tommy Thompson is expected to decide this week whether to recommend voluntary anthrax vaccinations for about 3,000 people who had high levels of exposure to it. Studies show that combining antibiotic treatments with anthrax vaccinations boosts survival rates. Vaccination would be recommended for those who inhaled a heavy dose of anthrax spores, worked in buildings where tainted letters were opened, had co-workers who developed inhalation anthrax, or were advised to take antibiotics for two months. 
Some critics, however, raised concerns about adverse side effects from the vaccine, especially among older workers in less than robust health.