Washington Redskins cornerback Darrell Green is likely to overturn his decision to retire following the season and might announce within the next few days that he intends to return next year for a 20th season, sources close to the situation said yesterday.
Green, 41, said he intended to discuss the issue with his wife, Jewell, last night and make a decision "real soon." He indicated last week he is considering a return because so many fans have urged him to come back. There were several banners at FedEx Field urging Green to return yesterday as the Redskins lost to the Philadelphia Eagles, 20-6.
"I've got to do it quick," said Green, who announced his retirement on Sept. 4. "I have to move one way or the other. I have time-sensitive issues for myself. . . . I'm going to put a real focus on that starting [last night]. I owe it to myself. I owe it to my family. I owe it to the organization. I need to move forward."
It was an active day for Green, who suffered a shoulder injury and surrendered a touchdown pass but persevered to get his first interception of the season. That extended his NFL record to 19 straight seasons with at least one interception.
"I'm not one who really rides off that stuff," he said. "But fortunately, when you play 19 years, you have a chance to get some records. . . . I do appreciate them, but I appreciate them in the privacy of my own basement at home."
One source said earlier yesterday it was virtually certain that Green would return and an announcement probably will come soon. According to the source, the exact timing of the announcement was not clear, but Tuesday is a possibility, barring a last-minute snag or a change of heart by Green. Tuesday is the weekly day off for the Redskins players. Another source said later that Green's return was likely and an announcement could come today.
Green and the Redskins apparently would like to resolve the matter before they would have to begin making preparations to stage a farewell game for Green. If Green sticks to his retirement plan, his final regular season game is scheduled for Jan. 6 against the Arizona Cardinals at FedEx Field. Green said his decision would be made before the end of the season.
"The community has responded to my commitment to them," he said. "That's what made me look at this. The doors are open. I'll try to move quickly to determine that. I have a life, and I have a vision for my life."
The fans' sentiment was clear yesterday, with several banners hung at FedEx Field imploring Green to come back. "Don't Go, Darrell!" one sign said. Another read: "Make It 20 Years, No. 28!"
The crowd cheered loudly and chanted Green's name when Green walked off the field after suffering a pinched nerve in his left shoulder trying to make a tackle on a first-quarter play. He returned to the game and was covering Freddie Mitchell when the Eagles' rookie wide receiver made a tumbling catch for a four-yard touchdown reception from quarterback Donovan McNabb in the second quarter. Green had tight coverage, but Mitchell made his first NFL touchdown catch anyway.
In the fourth quarter, though, Green stepped in front of Eagles wideout Na Brown and grabbed a McNabb pass for his first interception of the season.