Intelligence sources told ABCNEWS they believe that they now have in custody some of Osama bin Laden's most senior people. 
Although officials, lacking photographs and fingerprints, were having some problems identifying these individuals among the bedraggled masses, sources said other prisoners are starting to finger their former leaders and provide information on where bin Laden might be. 
At the same time, administration officials appeared to be warning that the war on terrorism had a long way to go and that it might go far from Afghanistan.
Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz on Tuesday warned countries against harboring bin Laden as he admitted al Qaeda cells were still operating in several countries. 
"I just think any country in the world that would knowingly harbor bin Laden would be out of their minds," Wolfowitz told reporters. "I think they've seen what happened to the Taliban and I think that's probably a pretty good lesson for people not to do that."
Intelligence sources told ABCNEWS their best guess is that bin Laden is still in Afghanistan, but is most likely in high mountain passes, trying to walk out of the country to Pakistan.
Military sources said bad weather has obscured American surveillance efforts along the border, but teams of U.S. special operations troops are in some of those high passes, waiting for the opportunity to strike. 

agents are now in southern Afghanistan to help interrogate al Qaeda members who have been taken prisoner. Eight agents investigating the Sept. 11 terror attacks on the United States arrived there late Monday.
"It's the first time we've been in a foreign country while bombs are falling since looking for Nazis in South America in the 1940s," FBI agent Thomas C. Knowles told reporters at the U.S. Marine base at the Kandahar airport.
In the Tora Bora mountain region, another 50 al Qaeda prisoners were pulled from some of the most remote caves Tuesday, unaware their brethren had abandoned them and were fleeing. Many of them may be moved to the new detention compound at the Khandahar airport, which received its first 15 battlefield detainees Tuesday. 


Two U.S. soldiers have been badly injured. One stepped on a land mine at the Bagram airport Tuesday, and had his foot was amputated. He was the fourth U.S. soldier to be in hurt in a land mine accident in Afghanistan, one of the most heavily mined countries in the world. Another was bitten by a cobra while pulling guard duty at an airfield in Pakistan. His heart stopped briefly. Both are headed for an American Army hospital in Germany.
The count of dead and missing at the World Trade Center stands at 3,018. New York City officials say 515 people are missing. The medical examiners office has issued 502 death certificates, and 2,001 death certificates have been issued without a body at the request of victims' families. 
'Martha Raddatz and John McWethy in Washington contributed to this report.