In a statement released today, an attorney hired by Walker's parents said the 20-year-old deserves the same Constitutional rights as any American citizen and complained that, outside a dictated letter, Walker's parents have not been allowed to have access to their son.
"We still do not know what the facts are," attorney James Brosnahan said in the statement. "All we've heard is speculation and rumor. No one from the outside, other than the Red Cross, has seen John. Whatever the accusations, John has Constitutional rights. Getting the facts, allowing an accused person to talk with his attorney, ensuring that our system operates fairly regardless of the allegation that is what the Constitution was designed to protect."
"John has the right to counsel," Brosnahan added. "He has now been in custody and reportedly subject to ongoing interrogations by various government agents for 16 days without any access to an attorney and without the ability to communicate with his family." 

Walker is recuperating from a gunshot wound and cooperating with authorities on a ship in the Arabian Sea after U.S. officials decided to move him from a Marine base in southern Afghanistan last week. Authorities say he is giving them information, and they are particularly interested in what he may know about the failed prison revolt at Mazar-e-Sharif where CIA operative Johnny Micheal Spann was killed. 
While Walker has cooperated, U.S. officials have mulled his fate, trying to figure out what charges, if any, he may face. Congressional leaders have suggested he could be charged with treason, but White House officials say his case is not that simple.
"I don't think this is a typical case," said White House spokesman Ari Fleischer in his daily press briefing today. "This is a case where an American citizen was found in a country abroad in which he was doing battle with the United States." 

U.S. officials have also hesitated in labeling Walker, refusing to call him a prisoner of war and preferring "battlefield detainee." However, the Pentagon says that Walker is receiving food, water, and medical attention and being treated like a prisoner of war.
"He's being treated consistent with the Geneva protections for prisoners of war," said Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz. "So he enjoys all the protections that would go with 'prisoner of war' status."
U.S. government officials have indicated Walker may be coming back to the United States soon. Still, Walker's parents, Frank Lindh and Marilyn Walker, complain that they have repeatedly asked to government to help them gain access to their son. 
Brosnahan said the only correspondence they have had with Walker is a letter he dictated to a Red Cross worker they received last week. They say they have since replied with a letter of their own and do not know whether it has been delivered to him. 
Reported by ABCNEWS' Pierre Thomas.