When they needed it the most, Charles Roberts came through. 
Roberts broke open a tight game by returning a punt 58 yards for a touchdown early in the third quarter, then Eric Blount added a pair of late touchdowns as the Winnipeg Blue Bombers won their 12th consecutive game and dealt another blow to the B.C. Lions playoff hopes with a 26-18 CFL victory Saturday night. 
"They played good defence at the start and it took us a while to get going," said quarterback Khari Jones, who hit Blount with a 17-yard touchdown pass in the fourth quarter. 
"When we got going we got going pretty well. Once we got that lead early in the second half everybody felt good about things." 
Blount also scored on a three-yard run late in the game as the Bombers improved their East Division-leading record to 14-2. 
Winnipeg set a club record for most consecutive wins, breaking the old mark which dates from the last week of the 1959 season through the first 10 weeks of 1960. 
"That's a great thing," said Jones, who completed 18 of 28 passes for 202 yards. 
"It's a great accomplishment. We're still competing every week. A lot of people said we might lay down for this game. I don't think this team knows what's that like, not to compete." 
The loss was the fourth in a row for the 6-9 Lions who have lost six of their last seven games. The defending Grey Cup champions sits third in the CFL West but could lose the last playoff spot to the Toronto Argonauts who have a 6-9-0-1 record for 13 points. 
Sean Millington scored on a one-yard run for B.C. in the first half. On the last play of regulation time quarterback Damon Allen threw a 35-yard touchdown pass to Jimmy Oliver. Oliver also caught the two-point convert. 
"We didn't do much offensively," said a frustrated coach Steve Buratto. 
"The Bombers did a good job in the second half moving the football on us." 
The Lions had a punt return for a touchdown called back on a penalty. 
Slotback Geroy Simon also dropped a pass in the first quarter that could have resulted in a touchdown. 
Trailing 19-7 late in the fourth quarter, Buratto brought boos from the crowd of 23,510 when he elected to kick a 17-yard field goal instead of gambling on third down. 
The Lions led 7-2 at the half but Roberts put the Bombers ahead to stay early in the third quarter when he took a punt and rambled to the end zone, slicing through the B.C. defence like a hot knife through butter. 
Some heavy hitting in the first half took its toll resulting in almost as many injuries as points. 
The Lions lost running back Robert Drummond on the game's first series when he was crushed by Bomber linebacker Brian Clark as he tried to run around the end. Drummond returned in the third quarter. 
Winnipeg linebacker Ryland Wickman was taken off the field on a cart with a knee injury and was taken to hospital for X-rays. Milt Stegal, the Bombers leading receiver, left the game in the second quarter after taking a brutal hit from halfback Warner Herndon. He spent the rest of the game on the sidelines in street clothes. 
The Bombers started the game with backup Brian Ah Yat at quarterback. He completed five of nine passes for 32 yards before being replaced by Jones in the second quarter. 
If Toronto finishes with more points than the third-place team in the West Division, the Argos will cross over and take the final West playoff spot. 
Earlier Saturday the Calgary Stampeders defeated the Montreal Alouettes 29-9 to improve their record to 7-9-0-1 for 15 points and second place in the West. Edmonton leads the division with a 8-8-0-1 record for 17. 
H e a d l i n e s :