Prime Minister Jean Chr tien said while he cannot promise the war on terrorism will be painless, Canada has readied troops to support the United States. 
The prime minister made the comments Sunday afternoon during U.S. and British air strikes against Taliban targets in Afghanistan. 
Chr tien said last Friday evening, Bush asked Canada to make "certain contributions" to the multinational military coalition against terrorism. 
He said he immediately agreed, and ordered the minister of national defence to agree. He then met with the Chief of National Defence Staff to confirm the role that Canadian forces would play. 
Shortly before noon Sunday, Chr tien spoke to Bush on the phone and confirmed that he would provide the support the U.S. requested. He then issued a warning order to the defence staff for certain armed forces units to be ready. 
Chr tien said he would not provide any further information on the military action because it could endanger lives. 
The prime minister praised the Canadian military and said that they must be strong and vigilant. 
"All Canadians understand what is being asked of the men and women of our armed forces, as well as their families," Chr tien said. "As always they are ready to serve, and as always they will do Canada proud." 
"We must insist on living on our terms, according to our values, and not on terms dictated from the shadows," he added. 
Chr tien also informed opposition party leaders Sunday afternoon that military action was imminent. 
Conservative Leader Joe Clark said he was pleased the prime minister called him. 
"That's the kind of co-operation within the Canadian family that is required," said Clark, noting he was glad Canada is playing a role in the effort. 
Although the prime minister did not release any details about Canada's role, Clark and Canadian Alliance Leader Stockwell Day shared some of what they were told. Clark said Chr tien indicated Canada will offer communications support, while Day said he understands it will include ships and air transport. 
Written by CBC News Online staff