Jerry Colangelo knew Diamondbacks fans had some growing up to do last year, when Todd Pratt batted at Bank One Ballpark for the first time since his home run eliminated Arizona in 1999. 
There were hardly any boos. 
"It's an indication that the fan had a ways to go in terms of being sophisticated or following their team and knowing who the villains are and who the villains aren't," the Arizona owner said Friday. "I think there was more of a following this year." 
There was a line of fans waiting to get into the merchandise store Friday at the BOB, stretching out onto the sidewalk as people waited in the Sonoran Desert heat to buy anything in purple and gold in preparation for Saturday's World Series opener against the New York Yankees. 
"People are going absolutely bonkers in buying shirts and caps," said Colangelo, hearing a "ka-ching!" each time the cash register clicked. 
Still, the laid-back fans in the desert sunshine are at a polar opposite of their Bronx counterparts. 
"The fans in New York are, without a doubt, the most passionate, obsessive, obnoxious, loyal, demeaning, vulgar fans on the face of the earth," said Curt Schilling, Arizona's Game 1 starter. 
Colangelo -- who said he pitched ahead of former-Yankee Jim Bouton in the rotation at Bloom Township High School outside Chicago -- estimates the Diamondbacks will take in an extra $10 million US to $16 million US from the World Series, depending on how long the Series goes. 
Arizona, in its fourth major-league season, has wiped out an operating deficit by winning its first NL pennant. Its season-ticket base declined from 36,000 in 1998 to 27,000 in 1999 to 24,000 last year and 22,000 this season. 
Earlier this week, the Diamondbacks sold an additional 1,000 season tickets for next year in a promotion this week tying them to World Series seats, and with the added attention gained by the World Series, Colangelo hopes to get back to about 27,000 by the opening day. 
"The World Series is the biggest event ever to hit this state," said the 61-year-old Colangelo, also the controlling owner of the NBA's Phoenix Suns. 
His group paid a $130 million US in expansion fees for the Diamondbacks, gave up $25 million US in national television money to get the team, made $125 million US contribution to ball park construction and had $50 million US in startup costs. 
After going 65-97 in their initial season, the Diamondbacks embarked on a spending spree that included Randy Johnson and won the NL West with a 100-62 record in 1999 only to lose to the Mets in the first round of the playoffs. 
Arizona slipped to 85-77 and third place last year, then bounced back to go 92-70 and win a second division title. 
That's quite a contrast to 1998's other expansion team, the Tampa Bay Devil Rays, whose 62-100 record this year matched Pittsburgh's for baseball's worst. 
"I had infrastructure in place. I had 30 years of experience in professional sports. Those are tremendous advantages," Colangelo said. "Philosophically, we had a different approach. We lost 25 per cent of our ticket base, and that's when I said we're going to have to compete now." 
H e a d l i n e s :