The Philadelphia Flyers ended a four-year regular-season winless streak against the New Jersey Devils at Continental Airlines Arena with a 3-1 victory.
Simon Gagne broke a 1-1 tie 41 seconds into the third period on a backhander low to the right side of goaltender Martin Brodeur after a right circle pass from Mark Recchi .
Brodeur made the initial save on a shot by Keith Primeau , but Recchi quickly directed the puck in front to Gagne, who scored his ninth goal of the season.
Ruslan Fedotenko scored his fourth goal of the season 8:10 later, picking up a loose puck and drilling a slap shot over Brodeur's right shoulder, dealing the Devils their third straight loss.
The Flyers were 0-7-3 at New Jersey since their last win in 1997. They have won here in the playoffs during that span.
Jan Hlavac scored his fifth goal of the season 7:24 into the second period with a backhander from the right side through Brodeur.
Just over seven minutes later, Bobby Holik tied it with a one-timer from the slot after a nice feed from Randy McKay behind the net.
Jay Pandolfo beat Eric Desjardins to a dumped puck by the back boards. Pandolfo chipped the puck to McKay, who followed the play and passed to an unmarked Holik, who beat goaltender Roman Cechmanek through the legs.

In Tampa, Florida, Nikolai Khabibulin stopped 26 shots and Ben Clymer scored his first goal in nine games to break a scoreless tie as the Tampa Bay Lightning blanked the sputtering Carolina Hurricanes, 2-0.
Making his sixth straight start, Khabibulin made nine saves in the first period, eight in the second and nine in the third for his second shutout of the season and 23rd of his career. He also whitewashed Los Angeles on October 25.
Clymer got credit for his fifth goal of the season and first since October 27 when his wraparound from the left faceoff circle 12:08 into the third period caromed off the right skate of Carolina defenseman Glen Wesley , who was battling Tampa Bay's Fredrik Modin in the crease.
Tim Taylor added an empty-net goal with 17 seconds left when Josef Vasicek of the Hurricanes made an ill-advised drop pass in his own zone to teammate Sami Kapanen . Taylor dove and pushed it into the open net for his second goal of the season and second in as many games.
Carolina's Tom Barrasso stopped 23 shots but was victimized by a bad bounce as the Hurricanes' winless streak reached four games on the heels of a five-game unbeaten run.
Tampa Bay improved to 2-2-0 on a five-game homestand that concludes Tuesday against Anaheim.

In Washington, Adam Oates scored his first goal of the season and handed out three assists as the Washington Capitals defeated the slumping Mighty Ducks of Anaheim, 4-1, for just their second win in 10 games.
The Capitals had a 2-1 lead 15:41 late in the second period when Oates took a pass from Ulf Dahlen in front of the net and tipped the puck past goaltender Jean-Sebastien Giguere for his first goal since March 7. It ended a 30-game drought.
Oates set up Washington's first goal on the power play 3:01 into the game when he passed to Dahlen, whose shot was stopped by Giguere. After the puck bounced loose in the crease, Jaromir Jagr picked it up and banged it in for his sixth goal.
Olaf Kolzig stopped 29 shots in his 11th consecutive start for the Capitals.
Giguere made 28 saves for Anaheim, which is winless in its last six games and 0-2-0 on a six-game road trip.

In Ottawa, the last time the Ottawa Senators faced the Toronto Maple Leafs , Karel Rachunek was carried from the ice on a stretcher. He left the ice a hero on Saturday night.
Rachunek squeezed a shot past Curtis Joseph with five seconds left in overtime as the Senators continued their regular-season mastery of the Maple Leafs with a 2-1 victory.
In the season opener on October 3, Rachunek was rammed into the end boards by Darcy Tucker and had his neck and head immobilized as he was taken to a Toronto hospital. But he missed just two games with a bruised back and played a key role in the latest renewal of the "Battle of Ontario."
Maple Leafs defenseman Dmitry Yushkevich lost the puck at the Senators blue line and Rachunek carried it all the way into the Toronto zone. Maple Leafs defenseman Aki Berg went down to cut off a possible pass and Rachunek reached the bottom of the right faceoff circle before flicking a shot over Joseph's left pad and into the net.
It was his first goal since March 26 and first career game-winner.
It also pinned a tough loss on Joseph, who put on a show in the third period and ended up with 25 saves.
Patrick Lalime stopped 28 shots to help the Senators to their seventh consecutive win over their provincial rivals.