New delays to the launch of Japan's first H-IIA rocket, made worse by the arrival of Typhoon Pabuk, are the latest in a series of headaches for its National Space Development Agency (Nasda). 
Nasda was set up in 1969 and launched Japan's first totally self-developed rocket, the H-II, in 1994. 
But the H-II programme was cancelled in 1999 after the first-stage engine of the rocket cut out too early and the rocket was deliberately destroyed along with its $83m (?57m) satellite payload. 
Six other H-IIs were launched and both the second and sixth launch missions had problems inserting their satellite payloads into correct orbits. 

Experience gained on the H-II programme has been incorporated into the H-IIA, intended as a competitor to Europe's Ariane system. 
The first H-IIA was due to fly in February 2001, but there were problems with the rocket's pipes and plating, and the launch was rescheduled for August. 
Now, problems with a valve in one of the rocket's engines mean it will not lift off before 28 August. 
Replacement parts are already at Nasda's Tanegashima Space Centre, but the arrival of Typhoon Pabuk means aircraft flights are being cancelled and a full investigation of the problem is being held up. 
Nasda is optimistic about the H-IIA's future, despite the cancellation in 2000 by Hughes Space and Communications International of a $710m (?489m) order for 10 H-IIAs. 

The H-IIA is designed specifically for commercial launches and costs half as much as its predecessor. 
It can put a four-tonne payload into orbit, and Nasda hopes that this will be extended to a 7.5 tonne capacity within two years. 
The 53-metre high rocket is built using 20% fewer parts than its predecessor, which makes it cheaper, and, with luck, less likely to go wrong. 
Nasda is well aware of the pressure it faces. 

"We're definitely feeling the heat," Nasda spokesman Keiichi Yamata told Reuters news agency. 
"There is a social environment right now that won't permit any more mistakes." 
Japanese newspapers are reporting that Nasda may face steep budget cuts as part of a drive to cut public spending. 
But Mr Yamata says that Nasda is keeping its mind on the H-IIA mission. 
"We can't think about budget cuts... We just have to have a successful launch," he said.