President Islam Karimov granted permission Friday for U.S. warplanes and troops to use an Uzbek air base to support President Bush's campaign to root out terrorists in neighboring Afghanistan. The U.S. Army dispatched 1,000 infantry soldiers skilled at search-and-rescue, humanitarian missions and helicopter assaults. 
The deal struck by Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld gave the Pentagon a foothold it needs inside Uzbekistan, a former Soviet republic on Afghanistan's northern border. But it was not clear from Karimov's comments whether it provided the wide latitude U.S. officials had sought for putting a military squeeze on Afghanistan's Taliban. 
Just a month ago before the terror bombings, the U.S. saw Karimov as strong man ruler, known mostly for his brutal suppression of human rights. Now the U.S. is building a war coalition, and Karimov just made partner. 
What the two countries do share is a common enemy in Osama bin Laden. Groups linked to bin Laden set numerous terror bombs in Tashkent over several years. When President Bush called for nations to join this war, the Uzbecks were almost first in line. 
"We have offered one airfield in Uzbekistan, with all the surrounding facilities, in order to deploy a limited number of (U.S.) transport airplanes and helicopters," Karimov said through an interpreter at a news conference with Rumsfeld. 
Karimov quickly added, "In Uzbekistan we are against the use of our territory for land operations against Afghanistan and we are against air strikes from the territory of Uzbekistan." 
"I envisage that the equipment will be used for humanitarian operations and for search and rescue operations," he said. 
Furthermore, the president said, no U.S. special operations forces - such as Army Rangers or Green Berets who specialize in operating behind enemy lines - would be allowed to operate from Uzbek territory. 
"We are not quite ready for this," he said when asked why no special forces could use the base. 
Click here to learn more about the war on terrorism. 
In exchange for cooperation, Karimov said Uzbekistan was seeking security guarantees. He said a legal document being prepared will spell out each side's commitments. 
Hours before Karimov announced the deal, about 1,000 troops from the Army's 10th Mountain Division, based at Fort Drum, N.Y., flew across the Atlantic en route to Uzbekistan, according to a senior defense official traveling with Rumsfeld. The official spoke on condition of anonymity and said no details about the exact locations of the troops or their missions would be made public. 
One possibility - convenient for its proximity to Afghanistan - is Kakaydi Air Base, 30 miles north of Termez. Kakaydi was built by the Soviets in the 1980s and used to launch attacks into Afghanistan. 
The 10th Mountain Division force is the first regular U.S. ground troops acknowledged by the Pentagon to have deployed to Central Asia. 
Earlier, other defense officials had said light infantry from the 10th Mountain would be used in Uzbekistan to provide ground security for U.S. Air Force fighter and combat search-and-rescue teams. 
The troops also would be on standby to come to the aid of any U.S. special operations troops that might encounter major trouble while conducting raids inside Afghanistan. 
The division performed similar missions in 1992 in Somalia and 1994 in Haiti. In Africa, soldiers secured major cities and roads to provide safe passage for relief supplies to the starving Somali population. 
In Haiti, the division's 1st Brigade arrived by helicopter from an aircraft carrier off the coast, occupied Port-au-Prince International Airport and worked to create an environment in which the government of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide could be re-established. 
Rumsfeld's three-hour stop in Tashkent was the fourth on a five-nation tour which began Wednesday in Saudi Arabia and Oman, two countries where thousands of U.S. forces are stationed. 
Rumsfeld also held talks in Cairo with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak on Thursday and flew to Ankara, Turkey later Friday. 
In Turkey, Rumsfeld met with Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit and the Turkish defense chief Sabahattin Cakmakoglu and thanked the only predominantly Muslim NATO ally for its support. 
Rumsfeld also said the United States is ready to work with various rebel and tribal groups within Afghanistan in the campaign against Osama bin Laden, the No. 1 suspect in the Sept. 11 terror attacks. 
"There are people in the Taliban who do not like the fact that foreigners have come in, the al-Qaida, and have taken over so much of the control" of their nation, Rumsfeld said of bin Laden's network. 
U.S. military aircraft can use Uzbek airspace. 
Uzbekistan is prepared to "upgrade" its intelligence exchanges with the United States. This is a key point, in Rumsfeld's view, because he believes the Uzbeks have valuable insights into Afghanistan. 
U.S. transport planes and helicopters and personnel involved in search and rescue operations can use one Uzbek airfield. 
The legal document spelling out the deal will be made public.