Thousands of Muslim protesters plan to flood the streets of Jakarta after midday prayers on Friday, the Islamic sabbath, to rally against the U.S.-led strikes on Afghanistan. 
At least two hardline Islamic groups who have vowed to expel foreigners from Indonesia, the world's largest Muslim nation, told Reuters they would call out their supporters for a fifth straight day of often rowdy demonstrations. 
"We will hit the streets. We will also deploy our special force to ensure the rallies go properly," Islamic Youth Movement (GPI) chairman Suaib Didu told Reuters. "About 10,000 people may join the rally. Many groups say they do not want to miss this." 
Early on Friday, Jakarta was mostly peaceful but security was tight. About 40 armored cars backed by hundreds of troops were positioned in the central Merdeka (Freedom) Square, across from the heavily fortified U.S. embassy. 
Jakarta police spokesman Anton Bahrul Alam said an extra 5,000 police, soldiers and civilian guards were on standby around the embassy, which was closed to the general public. 
The Islamic Youth Movement has signed up hundreds of volunteers -- men and women -- to fight against the United States in Afghanistan. Didu said dozens of its more experienced members have already reached the central Asian state through Pakistan. 
The Islamic Defenders Front (FPI), which plans to hunt down Americans and Britons to expel them after the government ignored its demand to sever relations with Washington and its allies, will also hit the streets. 
"This is an expression of our anger to the arrogant United States. We will rally every day until they stop (attacking Afghanistan)," FPI chief Muhammad Rizieq told Reuters. 
A U.S. embassy source said the embassy was concerned by the threats but was not aware of any efforts to hunt for Americans. 
Police have made clear violence against foreigners and wild rallies will not be tolerated and have said they would charge Rizieq for incitement. 
"Being arrested is my risk... I am not worried about it," he said. "My obligation as a religious leader is to say what is right and what is wrong. 
"We have not violated the law. It's the police who have... they ransack FPI tents and attack men who were doing their prayers in them." 
Many Muslim groups including mainstream organizations have slammed the government's refusal to condemn the air raids on Afghanistan in retaliation for the September 11 attacks on the United States that killed up to 5,600 people. 
Trying to tread a delicate balance between backing its key ally and appeasing Islamic radicals, Jakarta in its public comments urged the coalition to limit the attacks in Afghanistan to strategic military targets to minimize civilian casualties. 
The Islamic Youth Movement's Didu said he expected pro-U.S. provocateurs would try to provoke violence on Friday. 
"Certainly, there will be groups who want mess things up so that the police have a reason (to take action). It's all planned by the U.S., you see. And we are ready for it," he said.