In overtime, in the first of back-to-back games in cities separated by all of Texas and more, the Lakers gave the basketball to Shaquille O'Neal.
As a result, they haven't yet lost, seven games and nearly three weeks into a season that went from mundane to mad in two days off.
The Lakers defeated the Houston Rockets, 98-97, Thursday night at Compaq Center, where O'Neal scored 30 points, including seven of the Lakers' 11 in the overtime. O'Neal also had 13 rebounds, the last on a wild final-second shot by Kevin Willis. And as the Rockets, who once trailed by 15 points, cried for a foul and the Lakers stood and pushed toward their locker room, O'Neal swung the ball ferociously, celebrating a difficult victory against the Rockets' cut-and-slash set.
"We play better when we have to fight," said O'Neal, who earlier in the day expressed some disdain for Coach Phil Jackson. "So, good win for us."
Kobe Bryant scored 31 points and Lindsey Hunter, who missed two critical free throws late in the fourth quarter, clung desperately to Rocket point guard Steve Francis through every late, pivotal possession. Hunter had five steals and four assists.
Bryant had the other Rocket guard, Cuttino Mobley, quick and smart as Francis, particularly on the high pick-and-rolls. Together, Francis and Mobley scored 52 points, but were 18 for 47 from the floor, and the Lakers were satisfied with that.
"Guarding guys like Stevie Francis, you have to be ready," Hunter said. "Guys like that are going to attack all night. Reminds me a little of Allen Iverson."
O'Neal missed a jump hook near the end of regulation and lost the rebound out of bounds.
But that wasn't why they played an overtime.
Hunter missed two free-throw attempts with 16.5 seconds left, after the Rockets smothered Bryant on an in-bounds play. Mobley made two free throws 10 seconds later, and the overtime began at 87-87.
O'Neal dominated the next five minutes, however, and the Lakers were 7-0.
"I've played against him for 10 years and now he is coming into his own even more," Willis said of O'Neal. "He's gotten better as he's gotten mature."

O'Neal had a daughter, Amirah Sanaa, on Tuesday. Her name, O'Neal said, means "pure" and "beautiful" in the Muslim faith. ... Former Laker Mike Penberthy cleared waivers, and then received some interest from the Miami Heat, but remains unsigned.




Records--Lakers 7-0, Suns 4-5.
Record vs. Suns--1-0.
Update--The Lakers beat the Suns, 117-94, two weeks ago at Staples Center. The two Jakes--centers Voskuhl and Tsakalidis--had no chance against Shaquille O'Neal, who had 36 points and 13 rebounds.