W A S H I N G T O N, Nov. 14 All of the money raised by a Red Cross fund set up after the terror attacks will now go to the victims and their families.
Controversy surrounded the Red Cross Liberty Disaster Fund after it was revealed some of the money would be used to prepare for possible future attacks.
The chairman of the board of the American Red Cross says donors have since indicated they want all the funds directed toward people affected by the Sept. 11 attacks.
David McLaughlin told reporters today there was a "significant gap" between Red Cross efforts and what the American people wanted.
McLaughlin said it's taken the agency longer than it should have to make what he calls a "course correction."
The agency says it will provide a full year of basic living expenses for victims. It also says it will suspend further fund raising for the Liberty Fund.
The fund has raised more than a half-billion dollars. 


L E X I N G T O N, N.C., Nov. 14 A North Carolina sheriff's idea of Christmas cheer isn't going over too well in the Muslim community.
The Davidson County sheriff's personal Christmas cards this year show him in front of a desert background holding the severed head of Osama bin Laden in one hand and a bloody sword in the other.
The greeting reads, "Happy Ramadan!! Merry Christmas and Happy Holidays! Sheriff Gerald K. Hege."
Hege says he paid for the cards with his own money and will mail them to his friends, family and fellow sheriffs.
Some Muslims say they're insulted by card and the sheriff's reference to Ramadan, one of Islam's most sacred times. Muslims observe the 30-day period by fasting from sunrise to sunset. 


W A S H I N G T O N, Nov. 14 The Bush administration plans a major restructuring of the Immigration and Naturalization Service that would separate law enforcement and service duties.
The move would fulfill a campaign pledge by President Bush to reduce the long waits endured by people who apply for benefits such as naturalization or permanent residency. It also seeks to address deficiencies in how the INS tracks foreigners who enter the country.
Thirteen of the 19 hijackers in the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks entered the United States legally, but no entry records exist for the other six.
Commissioner James Ziglar was expected to announce the changes at a news conference.
The restructuring comes as Congress is considering its own plans for remaking the agency, including one that would abolish the INS and create two new agencies. Critics in Congress say they field more calls from constituents about INS-related problems than other agencies. 


W A S H I N G T O N, Nov. 14 The government says there are still "alarming lapses of security" at the nation's airports.
The Transportation Department's inspector general says there have been about 90 incidents involving poor security practices since Sept. 11.
Kenneth Mead told a Senate panel these have occurred even though tighter controls have been implemented.
Mead says the lapses include the inconsistent use of explosive detection systems to screen checked bags.
He says screeners have also failed to find knives and other dangerous items in carry-on bags.
The hearing comes as congressional negotiators try to craft a compromise aviation security bill.
The main stumbling block continues to be whether airport screeners should be federal workers. 


N E W Y O R K, Nov. 14 Thousands of high school students in the United States and around the world may have to retake their college admissions tests as a result of the anthrax crisis, U.S. education testing officials said Tuesday.
Answer sheets from as many as 7,800 students who took the SAT last month have not yet been received for scoring, said the College Board, the group that owns the SAT.
The College Board says it suspects the delay is due to the shutdown of post offices in New Jersey where anthrax was found.
The delay means some U.S. students as well as others in Saudi Arabia, Germany, Italy, Ghana, Liberia, South Africa and Haiti may have to retake the SAT, a standard test used to help colleges evaluate prospective students.
The New York City-based College Board said it believed the problem was the result of the shutdown of a regional mail processing and distribution center in Hamilton Township, N.J., on Oct. 18 and a post office in Princeton on Oct. 27.
The College Board said it would contact students who took the SAT on Oct. 13 by telephone, e-mail, and priority mail to tell them about the delay.
Students can elect to either register for the next scheduled test on Dec. 1 or take a makeup test at a later date at no additional charge. They could also get a full refund.
In October, about 550,000 students took the SAT at 3,600 test centers.