Federal agents arrested four people in Seattle on charges of trying to obtain fake licenses to drive trucks carrying hazardous materials after a tip from agents in Pittsburgh investigating the hijack attacks on Sept. 11, officials said on Wednesday. 
"They are charged with conspiracy to possess and obtain false and fraudulent identification documents, specifically commercial drivers licenses with a hazardous materials endorsement," said Lawrence Lincoln, spokesman for the U.S. Attorney's office. 
The suspects were identified as Ali Alazawi, 29; Hussain Sudani, 33; Haider Al Tamimi, 28; and Mustafa Al-Aboody, 29. 
Local television reported the suspects paid a middleman $350 each for a Pennsylvania license to haul hazardous materials without taking the test. 
On Tuesday U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft said some suspects that may be connected to the hijackings had sought licenses to transport hazardous materials, chemicals, waste or other potentially dangerous substances. 
Federal officials on Sept. 20 arrested Nabil Al-Marabh, a former Boston cab driver with a license to haul hazardous materials in Michigan, saying he was on a list of nearly 200 suspects and potential witnesses wanted for questioning on the Sept. 11 attacks. 
The U.S. Attorney in Seattle had no other information on where the suspects lived or where they were born, but said that their appearance in federal court was delayed until Thursday to give time to find Arabic-speaking translators. 
News reports said the suspects had been taken to a federal detention center south of Seattle. 
An FBI spokeswoman said investigators will probe for any links to the hijackers who crashed four jets in the United States on Sept. 11, including one that slammed into the western Pennsylvania hills. 
"Right now there is no information that links these people to any terrorist activities. It's information that came to us through the terrorist investigation, but we are getting a wide range of information on all kinds of violations through this investigation," FBI spokeswoman Robbie Burroughs told Reuters. 
"We will certainly be looking to see if there are any links (to the terrorists), but at this time there isn't any," she added. 
