Attrition houses a "defacement mirror," a log of hacked Web sites with a re-creation of the defacement. It also has original articles about computer security and hacking. 
a government-sponsored agency, was formed in 1988 to address Internet security threats. Based at Carnegie Mellon Institute, CERT claims to have "responded to more than 14,000 security incidents that have affected over 200,000 sites in the Department of Defense, other federal agencies and the private sector." 
A private organization that trains and educates members on computer and network security issues, CSI describes itself as an advocate for "the critical importance of protecting information assets." CSI recently released a survey of some 500 businesses showing a rise in internal and external network break-ins. 
is a repository for information on computer security for systems administrators, managers and security professionals. Includes in-depth information on encryption, viruses and document verification and an extensive list of links to related organizations. Sponsored by the Computer Security Division of the National Institute of Standards and Technology. 
is an online digest of security-related news from mainstream media and trade publications. Its computer crime archive includes links to the full text of academic addresses and topical issue papers. 
Internet Security Systems documents network attacks and security risks associated with particular computer operating systems. Site may be searched by platform and type of risk. Also includes archive of related news stories. 
Not to be confused with an Australian site of the same name, Infowar features articles by cyberterrorism expert Winn Schwartau and a comprehensive list of links to computer security news and resources. 
An FAQ on cyberwarfare from Don Gotterbarn of the Computer and Information Science Department of East Tennessee State University, this site includes answers to basic questions such as "What is Cyberterrorism?" and statistics on computer crimes. 
The Hackers' Alert section of this site, from the University of Southern California's Annenberg School for Communication, features a series of articles on hacking by OJR columnist and USC journalism professor Doug Thomas. 
This extensive glossary of jargon includes such words as "adger," a verb meaning, "To make a bonehead move with consequences that could have been foreseen with even slight mental effort." The Web site is the online version of "The New Hacker's Dictionary" (1996, MIT Press) compiled by self-described hacker Eric S. Raymond. 
A leading source of information on the hacker underground. Includes a thorough list of hacked Web sites. The site takes special interest in the case of Kevin Mitnick, charged with computer fraud in 1995. 
An adaptation of principles for hackers outlined by Steven Levy in his 1984 book "Hackers: Heroes of the Computer Revolution." Among the basic tenets: access to computers should be unlimited and total; all information should be free; mistrust authority -- promote decentralization. 
Dedicated to dispelling myths about the hacking subculture, Hideway says it is about "knowledge, not robbery or destruction." Site includes a jargon dictionary, chat room and media center. 
Compiled by Michelle Slatalla, the site highlights the activities and antics of several well-known hackers, from Richard Stallman, founder of the Free Software Foundation, to phone hacker Mark Abene, a k a Phiber Optik. Also includes a lively timeline. 
is a government watchdog group that seeks to "promote democratic values and constitutional liberties in the digital age." Their site tracks legislation on computer security and privacy, particularly measures concerning free speech, encryption and wiretapping. 
The modest goal of EFF, according to its mission statement: "to help civilize the electronic frontier." Perhaps best known as the force behind the Blue Ribbon Campaign against Internet censorship, EFF is dedicated to protecting free speech online through its lobbying efforts. Also includes an archive of more than 30 articles on hacking.