Like millions of young children, Terrel grew up playing arcade games and dreamed of owning one. New machines cost thousands of dollars, way out of the range for most 24-year-olds. Instead, he decided to build his own. 
He tracked down a guy in Cotati, California, who had a broken Pac-Man game he sold for $250. Once he had the game, Terrel spent the next few months scouring eBay and other Internet websites for a new monitor and control panel. 
When he got his parts, he gutted the game. He ripped the game's hard drive and joysticks out, and replaced them. He loaded the new hard drive with Atari games like Frogger and Defender. He mounted the motherboard under the monitor and turned on his sit-down, Atari 2600 arcade game. 
"You can buy something nicer than this, but building it is half the fun," said Terrel. "This would probably run Nintendo games as well, but this is really for old school. They have the cool new version of Frogger in arcades, but they don't have the old school one." 
To many, Terrel's journey seems odd. Yet thousands of people do it each year. There's even a Video Arcade Preservation Society , a collection of enthusiasts who share news with each other. Fred Thornbury built a business helping these people. His company AMDG Amusements builds and sells parts for damaged and out-of-service games. Coming by parts isn't easy, though, so he has a team scattered around the country looking for old motherboards, games and control panels. AMDG's five-person team uses those parts to create customized games. 
Most of AMDG's business comes from arcade owners who want to fix their inventory. That demographic changes each October, he said. "During the end of the year, it takes a little longer to make the games because women will order these for their husbands," said Thornbury. "Most people want us to build new tables because they don't want something that smells like a bar and they want to match it to their house and game room." 
The arcade business is doing so well, Bob Sokol's company Two Bit Score manufactures parts for just three games: Pac-Man, Ms. Pac-Man and Galaga. He still repairs pinball machines on occasion, but these days, arcade games are back in style. He's serviced games for 10,000 people in the last 20 years, mainly providing new glass monitor covers or worn out control panels. 
Business really picked up in the mid-'90s thanks to the Internet, Sokol said. People who owned broken games that languished in their garages and basements could fix up their prized possessions quickly and cheaply. 
Around the same time, a group of software developers began working the Multiple Arcade Machine Emulator. The nonprofit MAME project was started in 1996 by Nicola Salmoria to preserve old video games. The open-source software relies on unpaid programmers creating replicas of old arcade games in their spare time. The emulators can easily be loaded onto a rebuilt arcade motherboard, turning Ms. Pac-Man into its own mini-arcade. 
Game companies look down upon people distributing copyrighted titles and Sokol ran afoul of Namco, the company that licenses Pac-Man, for manufacturing parts without a license. Despite the troubles, game players have continued to build the better arcade. 
Have a comment on this article? Send it . 
Printing? Use this version.