By Elliott Teaford The Clippers are trying to avoid becoming impatient with the NBA over its handling of Lamar Odom's drug suspension.
Odom was suspended without pay for a minimum of five games Nov. 5 for violating the league's antidrug policy. The team then put Odom on its suspended list Nov. 7. He missed his sixth game Friday, when the Clippers lost to the Toronto Raptors.
Now, the team is starting to wonder when it might expect its best player to be reinstated. Because the NBA's handling of drug suspensions is a confidential matter between the league and the player, the team is in the dark. Odom also had heard nothing from the league, Coach Alvin Gentry said Saturday.
"Obviously, he's an integral part of our team," Gentry said of Odom. "We're just waiting to hear some information from the league. We've been trying to inquire, but until they say he's released from his suspension, we have to go under the assumption that he's not going to play."
Expect to see Corey Maggette filling in for Odom at the small forward spot for the seventh consecutive game today, when the Clippers host the New York Knicks at Staples Center.
"There are only so many people we can talk to at the league's headquarters in New York ," Gentry said. "Obviously, when he gets released from his suspension it will be a news event. Until then, we have to wait and be patient."

With Odom and backup point guard Keyon Dooling (sprained left ankle) unavailable, one might think Gentry would consider giving Quentin Richardson a start. But Gentry prefers to use Richardson as a reserve.
"It's not really important to me," Richardson said. "I just want to play. As long as I'm playing, I'm happy with that. My minutes are going up. When my minutes go up, my confidence goes up."
Richardson has had three games of 20 points or more and two others of 17 points or more. He is averaging 13.8 points in nine games--all as a sub.
vs. New York, 12:30 p.m.

Site--Staples Center.
Radio--KXTA .
Records--Clippers 4-5, Knicks 4-6.
Record vs. Knicks --1-1.
Update--The Knicks are winless in five road games heading into a three-game trip to play the Clippers, Golden State Warriors and Phoenix Suns. Marcus Camby (sore left foot) and Larry Robinson (tendinitis in his right knee) are on the injured list and cannot play for the Knicks.
Tickets-- 462-2849.