That's the impression one gets this week, when the market for initial public offerings swings back into action with offerings from three companies. The burst of activity, although comparatively tame compared to the excesses of early 2000, makes this one of the busier weeks of the year for IPOs. 
This time around, however, the biggest deals on the agenda aren't coming from fresh-faced startups with high-flying plans for future profits. The two largest offerings of the week, Instinet and Global Power Exchange, are both profitable companies that were around long before the Internet ever became a household buzzword. 
They're able to go public at a time when few others are able to generate much interest from investors. 
"Perhaps the investment banking world's strategy is if we can't bring public new companies, we'll just take the old companies and put them out in some shape or fashion to get the deals done," said Richard Peterson, market strategist at Thompson Financial. He says investors who were burned by high-flying stocks last year are looking for companies whose performance in the real world can support their stock market valuations. 
That's not to say that newer tech companies have been entirely banished from the lineup. This week's IPO calendar, for example, includes an offering from Tellium , a maker of optical switches that was founded in 1997. And two weeks ago, Simplex Solutions, which develops technology for producing chips, saw its stock soar more than 70 percent in first-day trading. 
But those deals are increasingly the exception, rather than the rule, said Peterson, who believes "new economy" companies will continue to have a harder time getting new cash. 
"In the near term, it's going to be the old economy: oil and gas, real estate, insurance," Peterson said. Maybe a touch of high finance, too. 
The fact that any companies are going public is cause for some optimism, said Irv DeGraw, director of research at WorldFinanceNet . He believes the market for IPOs is finally showing sings of "fighting its way back." 
All that's left to see this week is whether investors will bite. 
DeGraw says it's virtually certain traders will flock to Instinet Group , the Reuters-owned electronic stock-trading business that is looking to raise up to $398 million in an offering next week. Besides being a well-known name among investors, Instinet has a history of profits and steady growth. 
Another popular pick is probably Global Power Equipment, a Tulsa, Oklahoma company that makes equipment for gas turbine power plants. Like Instinet, Global Power has also been around for decades and has a history of profits. The company should also benefit from investors' recent enthusiasm for energy-related stocks. 
DeGraw is less optimistic about the youngest IPO candidate of the week, Tellium, a networking firm that he calls "a throwback to the dot-com mania era." The company, which has an accumulated debt of $206 million, is looking to raise up to $112 million in its IPO. 
Have a comment on this article? Send it . 
Printing? Use this version.