Yahoo ( YHOO ), long known for its youthful management team, breakneck rate of growth and steep stock appreciation, has more recently felt the pain of an economic downturn as well as a scattered strategy that was not always focused on the bottom line. 
Yahoo's shares hit an all-time high of $216.34 in January 2000, but like other Internet shares they have taken the dot-com plunge and at Thursday's close they stood at $14.83 -- well above their 12-month low of $8.02 but way off their year-high of $60. 
The company said it will actually cut 400 jobs, but it will continue to hire people to build up key business areas. It expects the net job reduction to be about 300. Most of the jobs being cut, it said, will come out of its international and broadcast divisions, and from middle management. 
Thursday's meeting was the first time that Terry Semel, Yahoo's Chief Executive of the past seven months, has outlined a broad plan to turn things around. 
Referring to the company's old strategy to "get big fast by providing a broad set of Web services," Semel remarked, "That couldn't possibly be the strategy going forward." 
Specifically, he said that while Yahoo will continue to focus on selling advertising to support its site, it will move to achieve more of a 50-50 balance between advertising revenues and those generated from fees on business and consumer services. Advertising, which is expected to account for 76 percent of total company revenues this year, should come down to 50 to 60 percent of the mix by 2004, Semel said. 
Another major prong of the new strategy involves collecting money from more of the 210 million people who regularly visit Yahoo. Semel said he hoped, within a "reasonable" time period, to achieve "a direct billing relationship" -- through subscriptions and other fee-based services -- with some 10 million of Yahoo's users. He gave no specific time target for that goal. 
During the all-day meeting, various Yahoo executives filled in more of the details of the turnaround strategy. As part of a previously announced plan to eliminate fluff from the site, Yahoo said it would cut some lifestyle, small business and business-to-business marketplace features. 
It is also scaling back its focus on online greetings and local content by pursing partnerships with other companies. 
The company also devoted considerable time to explaining how it thought it could grow its advertising and marketing business, by offering a broader set of products that went beyond plain banner ads and took advantage of all the consumer data it had collected. 
But beyond the specific business plans announced there was a broader sense that Yahoo was striving to change its culture. Thursday's event was marked by more gray haired executives, who displayed an uncharacteristic humility and acknowledged that the company's problems would need to be addressed at the roots. 
Wenda Millard, the recently appointed Chief Advertising Sales Officer, even offered an "in" and "out" list. In a reference to some criticism that the company had been arrogant and unresponsive to business partners she said that cooperative relationships were in and the "my way or the highway" attitude was out. Willard said the customer was in and arrogance was out. 
In stark contrast to Yahoo's early days as a startup founded by two young graduate students, maturity is apparently also in. Greg Coleman, Yahoo's executive vice president who is actively involved in building more marketing and advertising partnerships said, "You can't do it with youth and enthusiasm." 
Coleman said that the company had recently hired 30 new ad sales people, who were for the most part 40- or 50- something and had years of experience and established contacts with the major ad agencies. 
"It makes you sleep well at night," he said. 
Have a comment on this article? Send it . 
Printing? Use this version.