Mike Tyson is applying to have his Michigan boxing license reinstated in a possible attempt to fight heavyweight champion Lennox Lewis in Detroit.
Jerome P. Barney, chairman and chief financial officer of Detroit-based All World International Network LLC, said Thursday that Tyson's application was expected to be delivered Friday to the state Athletic Board of Control.
Barney said he was confident he could win state approval and persuade Tyson and Lewis to hold a June fight at Joe Louis Arena.
Barney said Detroit's long history of boxing and the presence of downtown casinos make it an ideal place to hold what he called a "the fight of the new millennium."
"This is going to be world news," he said. "Detroit is going to be a world stage."
Shelly Finkel, Tyson's adviser, said the chances that Tyson would choose to fight in Michigan are "very high." He said he was working on a deal that would bring the fight to the state.
Patrick English, general counsel for Main Events, Lewis' New Jersey-based promoter, said none of the cities reported to be in contention have been ruled out. But he said Washington appears to be leading the pack.
Another plus for the city is its proximity to Canada, which Barney said he thinks would appeal to Lewis who grew up in Ontario and make the fight a "battle of the border."
Barney, who is a member of the Board of Control, said Tyson's checkered past should not stop him from having his license reinstated.
"This is a fight," he said. "This is the sweet science of pugilism. They're going to get into the ring and try to knock each other out. He's served his time and the other allegations are unfounded. It's all part of the hype."
Michigan can deny a boxer's license only if he is on suspension in any other state, in jail or fails a pre-fight physical. However, a bill being considered by a state House committee would require boxing license applicants to demonstrate "good moral character."
David Sebastian, chairman of the Athletic Board of Control, also was at Thursday's new conference. He would not comment on Tyson or the potential fight, but said anyone objecting to Michigan's existing license requirements should urge their state lawmakers to support the House bill.
Former boxing great Thomas Hearns also is trying to stage a Tyson-Lewis fight in Michigan. He filed paperwork with the state on Feb. 6 requesting permission for an April 6 bout at the Pontiac Silverdome.
Tyson and Lewis were scheduled to fight for the heavyweight title that night in Las Vegas, but Nevada officials voted 4-1 to deny Tyson a license to fight in that state.
"I'm still trying to make something happen," said Hearns, whose Hearns Entertainment Inc. filed notice and a $50 fee with CIS. The application doesn't name boxers who would fight at the event. Out-of-state boxers typically are licensed the night of an event.
Washington, California, Texas, Georgia, Denver, England, Denmark and the Netherlands also have been among the sites floated as possible venues for a Tyson-Lewis fight.
In January 2001, state regulators suspended Tyson's Michigan boxing license for 90 days and fined him $5,000 for refusing to submit to a urine test before an October 2000 fight against Andrew Golota at The Palace of Auburn Hills.