Indianapolis Colt running back Edgerrin James will sit out at least two more games because of a knee injury, but quarterback Peyton Manning is expected to play Sunday despite a broken jaw.
James, the two-time NFL rushing champion, was hurt in the Colts' victory over Kansas City Oct. 25 and did not play the past two weeks. They are the first games he has missed in his three-year pro career.
James practiced late in the week after his injury but felt some swelling and stiffness in his left knee. Further tests showed ligament damage. "Our doctors felt it was appropriate to shut him down for another two or three weeks," Colts' President Bill Polian said Monday. "They're not certain what the severity is."
Manning, who has started every game for Indianapolis the past four seasons, suffered a hairline fracture of his jaw in Sunday's 27-24 loss to the Miami Dol-phins.

Denver Bronco running back Terrell Davis suffered torn cartilage in his left knee and will probably sit out two games, the latest setback for a player sidelined most of the past three seasons.
Davis' arthroscopic knee surgery will keep him off the field for about 10 days, meaning he will be sidelined for Sunday's home game against Washington and probably a Thanksgiving Day game in Dallas.
Davis injured his knee on a hit in the second quarter of Sunday's 26-16 victory over San Diego. He played the rest of the game, rushing for 83 yards in 33 carries.

George Seifert tried to dodge questions about his future as Carolina's coach, reluctantly saying he plans to return to the Panthers next season.
Seifert, 16-25 in two-plus seasons with the Panthers, is riding an eight-game losing streak, including Sunday's 48-14 loss to the St. Louis Rams.
When asked if he wants to continue coaching next season, Seifert initially tried to deflect the question. Seifert has two years remaining on a five-year deal.
"I think that's really not the issue," he said. "The issue is this football game and our next game. Maybe there is nothing else to ask, so we'll ask the old standby--Is he coming back?"

Buffalo quarterback Rob Johnson will be sidelined three to five weeks after breaking his right collarbone during the Bills' 21-11 loss to New England.
Johnson was injured in the fourth quarter when he fell on his throwing shoulder after being sacked by Terrell Buckley. He left the game and was replaced by Alex Van Pelt.
Van Pelt will start for the first time since the 1996 season.
Johnson has had several injuries in the past three seasons, including last year when he missed five starts and was knocked out of four other games.

Denver Coach Mike Shanahan will meet with his team before making a decision on wide receiver Eddie Kennison, who told the coach he was retiring and then reconsidered.
The meeting with players and coaches will be on Wednesday, Shanahan said, and their input will factor into a final decision.
Kennison was declared inactive for the game against San Diego after telling Shanahan on Saturday night that he had lost his passion for the game and no longer wanted to play.

New England Patriot Coach Bill Belichick expects quarterback Drew Bledsoe to be cleared to return to practice this week and possibly be ready to play in the Patriots' game Sunday against St. Louis.
However, Belichick has not decided whether he will replace Tom Brady, who is 5-2 as a starter since Bledsoe, the No. 1 quarterback, as was sidelined by a chest injury.

The MRI on San Diego Charger safety Rodney Harrison's left knee revealed a strained--rather than a torn--medial collateral ligament.