Reversing the policy of his predecessor who supported Oregon's first-in-the-nation assisted-suicide law, Attorney General John Ashcroft said on Tuesday doctors may not dispense drugs to help terminally ill patients die. 
Overturning the policy adopted by Attorney General Janet Reno in 1998, Ashcroft sided with the Drug Enforcement Administration, which had long argued that doctors who prescribe drugs under Oregon's assisted-suicide law could lose their licenses to write prescriptions. 
Reno had rejected the DEA position, but Ashcroft said the DEA had been correct. 
"I have concluded that the DEA's original reading of the (law) -- that controlled substances may not be dispensed to assist suicide -- was correct," Ashcroft said in a memo to Asa Hutchinson, the DEA administrator. 
Oregon Gov. John Kitzhaber denounced the decision as an "unprecedented federal intrusion on Oregon's ability to regulate the practice of medicine." 
Oregon's attorney general vowed to challenge Ashcroft's decision in federal court on Wednesday by filing motions to block federal agents from taking action against doctors who help patients die under the state law. 
"One action seeks to overturn the Ashcroft opinion. The other seeks a temporary restraining order that would allow Oregon doctors to continue" to act under the state law, said Kevin Neely, a spokesman for state Attorney General Hardy Myers. 
"This is a complete reversal of what Reno said," Neely added. "But we are confident we will win the reversal." 
Kitzhaber, a Democrat and a former doctor, said the Ashcroft decision would "deprive terminally ill Oregonians of a crucially important choice in how they manage their final days. Oregonians are satisfied we can responsibly implement physician aid in dying." 
Kitzhaber also said Ashcroft's action would have a "chilling effect" on the willingness of doctors to treat pain aggressively. 
Ashcroft said controlled substances may be used to manage pain. 
"Pain management, rather than assisted suicide, has long been recognized as a legitimate medical purpose justifying physicians' dispensing of controlled substances," he said. 
"There are important medical, ethical and legal distinctions between intentionally causing a patient's death and providing sufficient dosages of pain medication necessary to eliminate or alleviate pain," Ashcroft said. 
While physicians are licensed by the states to practice medicine, the DEA registers doctors to prescribe drugs and the agency is responsible for enforcing the federal controlled substances law. 
Ashcroft based his decision on a Supreme Court ruling on May 14 that there was no exception in the federal drug law for the medical use of marijuana and that federal law may not be overridden by the legislative decisions of individual states. 
"I hereby determine that assisting suicide is not a 'legitimate medical purpose' within the meaning of (the law) and that prescribing, dispensing or administering federally controlled substances to assist suicide violates" federal law, Ashcroft said. 
The American Medical Association said, "Today's action makes a strong statement against physician-assisted suicide without hampering a physician's ability to aggressively relieve patient pain." 
Ashcroft said there was no change in DEA policy in states other than Oregon. 
The Oregon law specifies that physicians may use medications, but not lethal injections, to help a terminally ill patient commit suicide. Two doctors must agree that the patient has no more than six months to live and is mentally competent.