Chinese Foreign Minister Zhu Bangzao said on Tuesday the APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting, scheduled for October 20-21, would "show its concern over terrorism in a proper form." 
Zhu said as the host of APEC, Beijing was consulting with other countries on the format of the discussion. 
President Jiang Zemin will chair the Economic Leaders' Meeting, which will also be attended by President George W. Bush. 
At his regular briefing on Tuesday, Zhu reiterated Beijing's hopes that the global campaign against terrorism would be conducted under the auspices of the United Nations and its Security Council. 
The point about UN participation was also made during a telephone conversation on Tuesday between Chinese Premier Zhu Rongji and German counterpart Gerhard Schroeder. 
"Actions against terrorism should conform to the purpose and principles of the United Nations Charter and the acknowledged norms of international laws," Zhu said. 
And in his address to the UN General Assembly on Monday, China's representative Wang Yingfan said the UN should play an "important role" in counter-terrorism. 
"China will make its contribution to boosting international cooperation in the fight against terrorism" Chinese newspapers on Wednesday quoted Wang as saying. 
At the UN, Wang also made clear Beijing's opposition to Washington's deployment of a national missile defense (NMD) system. 
At the same time, the Chinese Foreign Ministry has called on Washington to lift the remaining sanctions on the country. Most of these have to deal with the export of high technology to Chinese companies. 
Diplomatic analysts said Beijing was seeking to play a more prominent role in the global war against terrorism. 
Chinese officials have made clear their strong reservations about the imminent military action in Afghanistan by the U.S. and its allies. 
Beijing has also hinted that in return for its cooperation in the anti-terrorist effort, the U.S. should make concessions including the lifting of sanctions on China and a delay in the deployment of NMD.