March 30, 2001 A hacker claims he managed to crack into a company's purportedly impenetrable security system. But the OpenHack III organizers say it was too little, too late. Still, the guy's getting a job interview out of it. By Michelle Delio. 
March 30, 2001 A new hole in Internet Explorer could allow a malicious hacker to take control of your computer simply by sending an e-mail with an attachment. By Michelle Delio. 
March 30, 2001 The Argentinean who created the kit used to write the Anna Kournikova worm -- evidently fearing legal repercussions -- removes it from his website. By Michelle Delio. 
March 28, 2001 More than 100,000 DSL customers look like they'll probably have to go through the experience (some say hassle, others say agony) of finding new service now that NorthPoint is going southbound. By Joyce Slaton. 
March 27, 2001 Indians have been flocking to software engineering programs for years. Now there's fear that nobody will be left to fill positions as chemical and electrical engineers. Manu Joseph reports from Mumbai, India. 
March 23, 2001 Flat-rate plans for dialup Internet service, once all the rage in Europe, are proving to be unprofitable. Inexpensive Net connections are only a dream. As one observer says, "The situation in the U.S. is kind of like science-fiction for us." Matt Hilburn reports from Madrid. 
March 23, 2001 Netmorf, a company that allowed users to access corporate databases and the Internet from any device, went out of business. What does this mean for companies of its kind? Elisa Batista reports from Las Vegas. 
March 22, 2001 The chipmaker releases a 1.3 GHz Athlon processor that it says is faster than Intel's best. And a future AMD chip will not be compatible with Intel chips, in a deliberate strategy that could split the market. John Gartner reports from CeBIT in Hannover, Germany. 
March 21, 2001 Just when you're getting comfortable with the idea of e-mail signatures, a Czech firm finds a bug in an OpenPGP format that allows an adversary who breaks into your computer to forge your e-mail signature. Declan McCullagh reports from Washington. 
March 21, 2001 President Bush's first international trip was to Mexico. Now Mexican President Vicente Fox makes his first official U.S. visit, and it starts Wednesday in Silicon Valley, not the White House. Interesting. By Julia Scheeres. 
March 20, 2001 An Australian man claims to have seen the final version of Apple's eagerly awaited operating system for the Mac. He's reviewed it on his website, but fears of getting a nastygram from Apple compelled him to encode it with PGP. By Leander Kahney. 
March 19, 2001 An alleged backdoor planted by the National Security Agency is the reason Germany's Defense Ministry is banning MS operating systems. But a German official denies there's any ban, and MS has always denied the backdoor. Steve Kettmann reports from Berlin. 
March 17, 2001 Texas is mulling over a public-private initiative to encourage students to choose majors in such fields as electrical engineering and computer science. Other states already have such programs. Courtney Barry reports from Austin, Texas. 
March 16, 2001 City officials are saying adios to Microsoft Windows and turning to the free open-source software because they'd rather spend money on social services than on software. As Mayor Andr?s Manuel L?pez Obrador says, "for the good of all, the poor must come first." By Julia Scheeres. 
March 15, 2001 South Africa's Econet has become the continent's third-largest Pan-African telecom operator, in large part because CEO Strive Masiyiwa doesn't listen when governments say no. Nick Wachira reports from Nairobi, Kenya. 
March 13, 2001 Microsoft won't officially be distributing the applications suite for another month, but someone has already posted a copy online. So much for those heightened security measures. By Andy Patrizio. 
March 13, 2001 The hasty deal made between the Internet's official overseer and its top registry continues to be a source of contention among those attending ICANN's board meeting. Stewart Taggart reports from Melbourne. 
March 13, 2001 MIT computer science honcho Michael Dertouzos wants technology to do away with the humdrum busy work that consumes our lives. Until then, and only then, will we reap the promise of the technology revolution. By Farhad Manjoo.