   
A key U.S. official on Friday pledged support for Russia's bid to join the World Trade Organization and thanked the Kremlin for backing Washington's campaign against terrorism.
Trade Representative Robert Zoellick said support for Russian WTO membership should not be seen, however, as a reward for its backing of the United States after the Sept. 11 terror attacks on the Pentagon and the World Trade Center.
"Sometimes, tragedy also presents opportunities for those who are alert. I hope now it will become even more clear than in the past that the United States, Russia, Western Europe and many other countries in the democratic community of nations have an interest in cooperating and working together," Zoellick said at a news conference.
Russian relations, long strained over Washington's plans for a national missile defense and over Russia's war in Chechnya, have improved with the Kremlin's vocal support for the United States campaign against terror.
The Russian media saw that as bettering the country's chances for entering the WTO.
"Some Russian experts believe that relations with Washington that have warmed up over the past few weeks would have an indirect influence on the negotiations," the daily Vremya Novostei said Friday.
A day in advance of Zoellick's declaration, the U.S. Department of Commerce said it was reviewing the Russian petition to be included in the list of market economies worldwide. Moscow has long bristled at Washington's refusal to acknowledge the free market status of its economy -- one of several obstacles to WTO membership.
Russia has failed to gain admission to the 142-nation WTO despite six years of campaigning, partly because of import barriers used to prop up inefficient state-run enterprises and other trade restrictions.
The Bush administration, while supporting eventual Russian membership in the WTO, had maintained the country needed deeper economic reforms.
President Bush wants the West to stop proping up the Russian economy with hugh loans, as has been the case since the end of the Soviet Union in 1991. The U.S. leader says internal Russian economic reforms should boost private investment.
Zoellick, hailing Russia's legislative progress in meeting WTO requirements, said a report on its readiness for membership would be ready early next year. 
