Developed by a Korean company, Taff System , the game was received enthusiastically at the Tokyo Game Show last year. Taff System recently signed a deal to distribute 200 Boong-Ga Boong-Ga machines in arcades all around Japan. 
Boong-Ga Boong-Ga leaves little to the imagination. Players can choose between eight tushy targets, including "ex-girlfriend," "ex-boyfriend," "golddigger," and "prostitute." Other characters include "mother-in-law," "child molester" and "con man." 
"This is a fun game of spanking the people who make your life miserable," advertises a badly translated brochure . "When you spank the character that you choose to punish, the face expression of the character will change as they scream and twitch in pain. The funny face expressions will make people laugh and relieve the stress." 
The player is not expected to spank the protruding bottom exactly, but to poke it enthusiastically with the attached plastic finger. On the screen, the character's face grimaces and screams with each finger thrust. The harder a player pokes the rear end, the higher his or her virility is rated. At the end of the game, the machine prints out a card explaining the player's "sexual behavior." 
Taff promotes Boong-Ga Boong-Ga as a safe outlet for players' pent-up frustrations. Academics and politicians have often blamed video games, rock music and TV for promoting everything from obesity to mass murder. But although female straphangers in the Tokyo subway system are often groped and pinched, it may be a stretch to reproach Boong-Ga Boong-Ga and similar games for causing such sexual assaults. 
"If enough games and media sources show a behavior as being funny or acceptable, then it can encourage that behavior," said Kathryn Wright, a psychologist in Raleigh, North Carolina, who consults at WomenGamers.com . "On the other hand, it depends on the individual. I think there are a lot of young boys who can play a game like (Boong-ga, Boong-ga), and know that it's not appropriate to go out into public and start pinching and poking people." 
Jack Morin, author of a sex manual, Anal Pleasure and Health, agreed. "Obsessions generally occur in response to intense prohibitions, which give the forbidden object heightened significance," he said. "The prohibitions work both ways. They encourage some people to 'tune out' the forbidden area or activity, while others get obsessed about it. Sometimes you see both reactions within the same person -- and perhaps within the same culture as well." 
In Japan, "Azeme," or "anal attacks," are a popular menu item in Japanese brothels, pink parlors and massage joints. 
"Almost all of these acts involving the female sex worker 'attacking' the male client's prostate with (their) fingers and other objects," said Katharine Gates, author of Deviant Desires, Incredibly Strange Sex . 
Another game for the PC, Chimgam , which was developed by a Korean company, features a squatting character who emits big, swirly poops. Players dodge the stools and shoot finger-like projectiles at the offending orifice. 
But while Chimgam certainly qualifies as asexual -- part of the Asian culture of cute -- Boong-Ga Boong-Ga is clearly a taboo buster. 
Boong-Ga Boong-Ga has been arousing the prurient interests of a few young men on the Net, but it seems unlikely to penetrate the American market. Its anal theme seems to cause some Westerners to tighten their sphincters. 
"I'm sure that there are some guys and girls out there who enjoy buttocks, and in select company I might play Boong-Ga Boong-Ga," says Alison (last name withheld), a former Carnegie Mellon University psychology student. "But as a console or PC game it's probably not something I would buy." 
Alison is the subject of Pantscam , part of a Carnegie Mellon student website that also includes a discussion of Boong-Ga Boong-Ga. 
For Pantscam, Alison stuffed a camera inside her pants and broadcast live pictures to the Internet, using Wi-Fi wireless connections on the Carnegie Mellon campus. Yet she never saw the site as sexually suggestive. 
"Pantscam is completely non-sexual, though people may infer sexual undertones, since the camera is in my pants," Alison said. 
Have a comment on this article? Send it . 
Printing? Use this version.