Going to unprecedented lengths to make amends to Japan, the Navy has devoted more than $60 million and thousands of hours to recovering the bodies of nine Japanese men and boys killed when a surfacing U.S. submarine sank their fishing boat. 
As of Friday, divers had recovered eight of the bodies from the wreck of the Ehime Maru. 
The USS Greeneville ripped through the hull of the Ehime Maru on February 9 as the nuclear-powered sub demonstrated an emergency surfacing drill for 16 civilian guests off Oahu. Twenty-six boys and men aboard the fishing boat survived. Three crewmen, two teachers and four student fishermen did not. 
The collision outraged the victims' families and soured relations with Japan. The Navy quickly apologized and, in an effort to show its remorse, began mapping how to retrieve the victims' bodies for their families. 
Never before had the Navy recovered a ship the size of the 830-ton Ehime Maru from so great a depth. 
After months of planning, engineers lifted the wreck from the ocean floor in 2,000 feet of water. Then the Navy used a heavy-duty oil rigger ship to tow the Ehime Maru underwater 16 miles, at a speed of less than 1 knot, to 115-foot waters so divers could enter the wreck. 
Since mid-October, 66 U.S. and Japanese divers have descended to search for remains and personal effects among the dislodged mattresses, tables and other debris in the sunken vessel's dark compartments. 
"They're very dedicated, and their spirits are up because they know this is very important," said Capt. Christopher Murray, the Navy's supervisor of diving. "They want to finish this and do the best job they can." 
The diving continued Friday as the Honolulu medical examiner's office identified the remains of Hiroshi Makisawa, 37, an instructor on the training ship operated by Uwajima Fisheries High School. 
Makisawa's remains were recovered October 19. Seven of the Ehime Maru victims have now been identified. 
His widow, Mika Makisawa, wears his platinum wedding band recovered from the wreck on her finger -- next to her own. 
"More than clothing or shoes, this is something he always wore," she said. "I'm happy I can be with him always." 
Makisawa told the Honolulu Star-Bulletin that she has not been able to tell her 4-year-old son about the death. The boy has been eagerly waiting months for his father to return from the fishing trip. 
"The accident happened and we can't reverse that," she said, "So I have to live positively and look ahead. Unless I forgive, the person who suffers is me." 
The submarine's skipper, Cmdr. Scott Waddle, was reprimanded and agreed to retire from the Navy at full rank and pension after disciplinary proceedings. Four other crewmen were disciplined. 
After a rare court of inquiry, U.S. Pacific Fleet commander Adm. Thomas Fargo found that Waddle rushed his crew through preparations for the drill and performed an insufficient periscope sweep. But Fargo did not recommend a court-martial, which upset family members again. 
The Navy has done well in respecting the Japanese families through the recovery and by accepting blame, said George Tanabe Jr., a University of Hawaii professor who specializes in Japanese religions. 
"Having done that, the feeling is to bring honor to themselves, take responsibility and make some kind of amends, even though it can't take away the tragedy," he said. "They are particularly motivated and committed not only to do it, but do it right." 
Tanabe briefed the divers and Navy officials about the sensitivities involved at the request of Rear Adm. William Klemm, the operation's commander. 
"Admiral Klemm's feeling was that even if it was a technical success, the whole thing could fail if they did something upset the families," Tanabe said. 
Recovering the bodies is especially important to the Japanese because they consider the body and soul as one, he said. 
The divers, who are living on a barge above the wreckage a mile offshore, have experience recovering bodies from airplane crashes, but they feel a special weight in their current mission. This time, they are searching for students who shared their aspirations of becoming seamen. 
Once the Navy's recovery operation is completed, the Ehime Maru will be towed six miles out to sea and allowed to sink in 6,000 feet of water. 
Copyright 2001 The Associated Press . All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.