BELFAST, Northern Ireland A handful of neutral politicians agreed, under British pressure Saturday, to join the Protestant voting bloc in Northern Ireland's legislature, a last-ditch deal designed to outmaneuver hard-line lawmakers and save the province's unity government. 
The decision by the Alliance Party, which represents both moderate Catholics and Protestants, freed the way for Britain to schedule another legislative vote, possibly Monday ? just three days after Protestant extremists prevented David Trimble's re-election as the government's senior minister. 
The longtime absence of a "first minister" has pushed the power-sharing government, the hardest-won achievement of the 1998 Good Friday peace agreement, to the brink of collapse. 
With Alliance's reluctant entry into the Protestant camp, a second-round victory by Trimble appeared likely and hopes grew that the four-party coalition would survive. 
The major hard-line Protestant party, Ian Paisley's Democratic Unionists, protested that Britain was behaving illegally and that Monday's scheduled vote would be invalid. 
Democratic Unionist leaders vowed to file a lawsuit against Britain. They demanded all sides respect Friday's vote, when Trimble received unanimous support from Catholic and neutral politicians ? but lost because of a 30-29 split on the Protestant benches. 
Electing a leader requires majority support from Catholic and Protestant camps, while the neutrals' votes carry no influence. 
Alliance had maintained independence from the Irish Catholic and British Protestant camps in Northern Ireland's 108-seat legislature since its creation in 1998, two months after the peace pact. 
But Alliance leader David Ford agreed Saturday to allow some of his party's five lawmakers to join the Protestant benches when the legislature reconvenes Monday. 
Trimble, who resigned in July in protest at the Irish Republican Army's refusal to disarm, sought re-election after the IRA's decision last week to begin getting rid of weapons. But many Protestants sought to block Trimble anyway ? the only means, they calculated, to wreck a coalition that to their dismay includes the IRA-linked Sinn Fein party. 
Democratic Unionist lawmaker Nigel Dodds, who is also a Cabinet minister, said government rules made Saturday the last day possible for Trimble's re-election. He said Britain was obliged to dissolve the legislature and call a new election. 
"Rather than going for fresh elections, which are now required, they are trying to rig the system and find some way of getting David Trimble back into government by the back door," said Dodds, whose uncompromising party expects to gain at Trimble's expense in any future Northern Ireland-wide election.
Britain, which retains ultimate responsibility for governing Northern Ireland, has twice forestalled the administration's collapse in recent months by stripping it of power, then quickly restoring it. 
These one-day suspensions of power had served to delay the deadline for re-electing Trimble, most recently to Saturday, and allowed the remaining 10 Cabinet ministers to run government departments. 
Trimble's defeat Friday demonstrated that despite the IRA's disarmament move, Paisley retained a voting bloc strong enough to create a government gridlock indefinitely. 
A further temporary suspension of powers, creating a new deadline of Dec. 14 for a successful Trimble re-election bid, wouldn't have changed that balance of power. 
So Britain instead spent Saturday seeking Alliance's transfer to the Protestant fold. Had Alliance not complied, Britain was also pursuing the possibility of rewriting voting rules to lower the hurdle of Protestant consent to just 40 percent rather than the current majority requirement.