Networking equipment maker Juniper Networks Inc. JNPR.O on Thursday reported third-quarter results that beat Wall Street expectations and said it had focused on finances in a tough environment. 
Excluding one-time charges, Juniper posted a profit of $32.5 million, or 10 cents per share. In the year-earlier quarter the Sunnyvale, California-based company had earnings of $60.3 million, or 17 cents per share. 
Revenues for the quarter were $201.7 million compared with $201.2 million a year ago. 
Shares jumped in after hours trade to $20.35 on Instinet from a close of $16.64 on the Nasdaq, where the stock had already gained 11 percent for the day. 
"It seems like a very solid quarter in an environment where a month ago everybody thought these guys were falling off a cliff," said SoundView Technology analyst Ilya Grozovsky. 
"They (results) are in line with the company's guidance, and that is obviously much better than the Street expected." 
Most analysts polled by research firm Thomson Financial/First Call predicted the company would post third-quarter earnings in a range of 5 cents to 9 cents per share. The consensus view was for earnings of 7 cents per share on revenue of $187.92 million. 
Juniper reported a slew of extraordinary charges, including a charge to contract manufacturers of $39.9 million, resulting in an overall net loss of $29.7 million or 9 cents per share for the quarter, compared with net income of $58.1 million or 17 cents per share in the third quarter of 2000. 
The company also announced a two-year stock buyback program worth up to $200 million. 
"The ability to deliver a strong bottom line in difficult times is strategic," said Chairman and Chief Executive Scott Kriens in a statement, adding that the company focused on financial fundamentals. 
Juniper stock has underperformed bigger rival Cisco Systems Inc. CSCO.O by about 70 percent this year, although both are down by more than half. 
Both also have perked up since Oct. 4, when Cisco reaffirmed the company's outlook for the fiscal quarter ending Oct. 31, although Mountain View, California-based Juniper declined to comment at the time. 
Networking companies were hard hit after major customers such as telecommunications firms found themselves with more capacity than needed, helping to propel the economy into the current slowdown.