The federal government will act immediately to take over control of airport baggage screening. Within a year all screening will be under federal supervision and done by federal, U.S.-citizen employees. For three years all commercial airports will be under the federal system except for five airports, of five different sizes, that volunteer for a pilot program to test different screening approaches. After the three-year period airports that meet strict federal standards will have the option to move to a different system using local law enforcement officials or private security firms. The Transportation Department may deploy law enforcement to bolster airport perimeter and access security.

Airports have 60 days to take the action necessary to expand inspections of checked bags. Full explosive detection systems should be in place by the end of 2002. Airports will be required to maximize the use of equipment to detect and neutralize biological and chemical weapons.

A new agency is to be created in the Transportation Department to have jurisdiction over transportation security.

The Transportation Department will develop a database to allow the cross-checking of names on watch lists of federal law enforcement agencies. Airlines will be allowed to implement trusted passenger programs to expedite screening on a voluntary basis. Air carriers must use the Air Passenger Information System to provide Customs with crew and passenger manifests and related information for each flight. Intelligence reports on terrorism must be shared with the Transportation Department.

Flight deck doors must be strengthened and remain locked while aircraft are in flight. Video cameras may be provided to alert pilots to cabin activity. Access to the flight deck is prohibited to those not in the flight crew. The number of Federal air marshals is to be increased, and they must be placed on every "high-risk" flight. The Transportation Department must develop guidance for flight crew anti-hijacking training. A switch must be located in the cabin for flight attendants to notify pilots of hijacking. The Transportation Department is allowed to authorize use of weapons in cockpits.

A $2.50 passenger fee for each emplanement, with a maximum of $5.00 for one trip.

Provides limited liability for the owners of the World Trade Center buildings and others harmed by the Sept. 11 attacks.