Americans should have a "heightened sense of awareness" in the wake of military strikes in Afghanistan, but should not "panic" or alter their normal activities, Attorney General John Ashcroft said Monday. 
Police at all levels, though, have altered their routines since a joint U.S.-British force started aerial assaults in Afghanistan. Federal, state and local law enforcement agencies have been put on a high state of alert, and are enacting a variety of new security measures across the nation. 
On Monday night, more than 80,000 football fans entering the Pontiac (Michigan) Silverdome for a nationally televised NFL game between the Detroit Lions and the St. Louis Rams were to be searched. They also were to pass through three security checkpoints. 
Police expected to have 25 to 30 percent more officers on hand to handle the crush, said authorities. Backpacks, large bags, coolers and even portable radios and TVs have been banned, police said. 
In New York, Gov. George Pataki announced Monday several hundred National Guard troops will be stationed at Grand Central and Penn train stations in New York City to provide additional security and visibility. The troops were to begin their duties at 6 a.m. Tuesday. 
"We're confident this will give the riding public all the security they need," Pataki said. 
In Washington, Vice President Dick Cheney remained at a secure, undisclosed location away from the White House, two administration officials told CNN. 
He had been scheduled Monday to swear in Tom Ridge as the new director of Homeland Security. Instead, Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas stepped in to deliver the oath. 
Ridge resigned as Pennsylvania's governor to take the new post, created by President Bush after the September 11 terrorist attacks. His job will be to close "gaps" in the country's security systems by coordinating the efforts of the scores of federal agencies charged with battling terrorism, Ridge said Monday. 
"The size and scope of this challenge is immense," he said. "We must protect, prepare for, prevent, protect against, respond to and recover from terrorist attacks." 
At a news briefing Monday, Ashcroft said federal law enforcement has been put on the highest level of alert, and more than 18,000 local law enforcement agencies and 27,000 corporate security managers across the country have been asked to consider whether stricter security measures might be necessary. 
"We are taking strong precautions and other appropriate steps to protect the American people while we win this war," he said. 
While companies that move cargo or goods are being urged to look at their security plans, they are not being encouraged to stop shipments, Ashcroft said. 
"We want secure operations," he said. "We do not want to cease operations." 
Federal agencies also are continuing a massive investigation into the attacks, Ashcroft said. So far, 614 people have been arrested or detained, and agents are seeking 229 others, he said.