Yugoslavia (AP) Ethnic Albanians anxious to determine their own futures mobbed polling stations Saturday to vote in the first province-wide elections since NATO and the United Nations broke Slobodan Milosevic's grip on Kosovo.
Lines snaked around schools and public buildings, but apart from some pushing and shoving, little serious trouble marred the vote to choose deputies for a parliament that will run Kosovo together with the United Nations and the alliance.
"I thank God for giving me life to see this moment," said Fatime Krasniqi, 61, who lost nine family members during the 1998-99 war. "I hope something better will happen to us now."
Ethnic Albanians see the vote as nothing short of a step toward independence a concept that frightened many minority Serbs into staying home.
Serbs remained split over participating in an election many fear will even further dilute the influence of the central Yugoslav government in Belgrade on the province.
While official election results were to be released Monday, a respected non-governmental organization monitoring the vote, Kosova Action for Civic Initiatives, said late Saturday that its exit polls showed that the party of pacifist leader Ibrahim Rugova took 44.7% of the vote.
The party of former rebel leader Hashim Thaci, the Democratic Party of Kosovo, finished second with 23.7% while Alliance for the Future of Kosovo finished third with 8.3% of the vote, Kosova Action said.
A handful of smaller parties got the remainder of the vote, including 10.1% that went to a coalition of Serb parties.
Polls opened with international and local police officers stationed at every polling station door. NATO peacekeepers patrolled the nearby areas, stopping cars leading to some stations and parking armored personnel carriers in front of others for extra impact.
Voters were electing a 120-seat national assembly that in turn will choose a president and form a provincial administration to govern alongside the U.N. officials and NATO-led peacekeepers who drove Milosevic's forces out of Kosovo in 1999.
Serbs are guaranteed at least 10 seats in the future parliament, but can get 20 seats if their turnout is high.
However, by the close of polls, turnout among eligible Serb voters was only 46%, compared with 65% among the province's ethnic Albanians, said the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, which was monitoring the election. In Serbia and Montenegro, home to about 200,000 Kosovo Serbs who fled after the war, turnout was higher at 57%, OSCE said.
Secretary-General Lord Robertson called the elections "a remarkable step forward toward normality" in the Yugoslav province. And the top U.N. official in Kosovo, Hans Haekkerup, said the vote was critical to the reconciliation process between the ethnic Albanian and Serb communities.
International officials and Yugoslav President Vojislav Kostunica had tried hard to persuade Serbs to take part. Some local Serb factions were opposed to the ballot and some Serb residents whispered of receiving threatening phone calls and letters urging a boycott.
In the divided city of Kosovska Mitrovica, only journalists wandered around streets made dark by one of Kosovo's constant power failures. Many people stayed home, fearful of incidents on election day despite stepped up patrols by the peacekeepers.
One Serb voter, Verica Stavric, 73, said she was not afraid.
"We're only living for right now," she said just after casting her ballot in the enclave of Laplje Selo. "I hope, for God's sake, it will be better."
Dozens of Serbs have been killed by ethnic Albanians and tens of thousands have fled Kosovo since forces loyal to Milosevic were ousted after 78 days of NATO air strikes in 1999. The bombing campaign ended fighting that killed at least 10,000 people, mostly ethnic Albanians.
Copyright 2001 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.