Baltimore Ravens tailback Jamal Lewis has been suspended four games by the NFL for violating its substance and alcohol abuse policy, a league source confirmed yesterday.
Even though Lewis is out for the season with a knee injury, the suspension began Friday and could end Dec. 17. Lewis, who is on injured reserve, will miss four game checks, or about $233,000, and is not allowed to have any contact with the team.
The ruling, first reported yesterday by the Baltimore Sun, indicated this is the second time Lewis has violated the policy. In a statement, the Ravens said they endorse the policy and added: "We support and help Jamal through this process."
The NFL does not disclose details of the substance-abuse violations and Lewis's agent, Mitch Frankel, did not respond to a phone message. 
Team sources said it was much too early to speculate about possibly drafting or trading for another back. In his rookie season last year, Lewis rushed for a team-record 1,364 yards and was a major factor in the Ravens' Super Bowl win over the New York Giants. As the fifth pick in the 2000 draft, Lewis signed a six-year contract worth about $35 million if all provisions are met.
Lewis suffered his injury Aug. 8 during a routine play near the end of a training camp practice. If his rehabilitation continues on pace, he should be at full strength by the start of training camp next season. The Ravens' tailback trouble continued after his injury. 
The Ravens signed free agent Terry Allen almost immediately to replace Lewis, and he led a modest ground attack with 357 yards on 100 carries before suffering an ankle sprain that sidelined him for two games. When he returned Monday night against the Tennessee Titans, he broke a bone in his left hand on his first carry. He will miss four to six weeks.
Allen's backup, Jason Brookins, has been effective running inside and had a 25-yard run against the Titans late in the fourth quarter that helped produce a 16-10 victory. Brookins will open at tailback today against the Cleveland Browns at PSINet Stadium, with Obafemi Ayanbadejo and special teams standout Moe Williams available on long-yardage situations.