The U.S. Postal Service plans to use a highly sophisticated technology -- polymerase chain reaction (PCR) -- to detect anthrax spores and other biohazards in the mail virtually as it is being sorted, postal officials announced yesterday.
The PCR technology is still being tested for adaptation to high-speed postal sorters, but by the end of September, USPS plans to sign a $200 million contract to install the PCR systems at 292 facilities around the country, Chief Engineer Tom Day said.
The discovery that PCR, sometimes called "molecular photocopying," can be used in automated fashion to help detect biohazards without waiting 24 hours for a lab analysis has enabled the Postal Service to cut its projected costs to fight bioterror attacks. Last November, Postmaster General John E. Potter asked Congress for $5 billion, about half of which was to be spent on irradiation technology to kill bacteria such as anthrax spores in the mail.
"Give credit to American technology and industry," Day said. "They've come up with a good approach for us in PCR."
Congress last December set aside $500 million to help the Postal Service -- walloped by steep drops in revenue and mail volume -- safeguard its customers, employees and the mail itself against bioterrorism. Congress asked USPS for a report on how it will spend the money.
The Postal Service plans to spend $245 million to retrofit its high-speed sorters, adding a system that will vacuum up air near the mail and feed it through a filter to capture any harmful bacteria, Day said.
About $35 million will be used to decontaminate and reopen two major sorting and distribution facilities -- Brentwood in Washington and Hamilton Township in Trenton, N.J. -- that were shut down last fall following the discovery of anthrax-contaminated mail. Day called it the agency's "number one priority." He did not know when the facilities would reopen, but said he hopes it will be in the next two months.
The agency is working with two firms that have developed PCR prototypes for post offices. They operate slightly differently, but both capture air samples sucked from mail and test the samples for biohazards. Bacteria such as anthrax spores have specific DNA signatures. PCR is a general term for a process that uses specific enzymes to amplify tiny quantities of DNA and make a DNA match.
The air samples would be taken in half-hour intervals and tested. If a biohazard is detected, the facility would be shut down, employees medicated and the facility cleaned.
"We're not making the claim that those employees are protected to the point they don't need medication," Day said. Rather, the intent is rapid detection and action.
Day would not disclose the names of the firms. One has a contract to help the military detect anthrax spores. The other has adapted the technology for doctors to conduct lab testing in their offices.
The systems will be able to detect eight biohazards, including anthrax spores. Day said the Pentagon will not allow the others to be named.
will also spend $10.5 million to repair the Church Street Post Office in Manhattan, damaged in the World Trade Center attack, and $500,000 to complete the plan to protect against bioterror attacks.
The Postal Service earlier bought eight "e-beam" machines for $40 million to irradiate and kill bacteria on mail. Four machines will be placed in a facility in the District, whose location will be disclosed through the process of seeking a permit for the devices, Day said. The other four will be placed in another site to be announced.