The British government plans to release additional evidence on Wednesday implicating Osama bin Laden in the Sept. 11 attacks on the Pentagon and World Trade Center, British and U.S. officials said yesterday.
The new dossier will update a bill of particulars laid out by Prime Minister Tony Blair on Oct. 4, and officials said it will rely heavily on statements bin Laden has made in videotapes since military strikes began hitting Afghanistan. Some of the tapes have not been publicly released, the officials said.
The new white paper will include information about past terrorist activity that bin Laden is accused of backing, the officials said.
"The case against bin Laden is airtight, but it's important to keep communicating that," a White House official said yesterday. "Every time bin Laden speaks, his isolation only grows."
As with the previous report, the new information will come from the British government, which consulted with U.S. officials before deciding to release it. The release is part of an effort by the United States and Britain to speak with one voice on the rationale behind the war on terrorism, in which Bush has found Blair to be his most faithful and aggressive partner.
National security adviser Condoleezza Rice has urged television networks to exercise restraint in broadcasting statements by bin Laden, contending that they stir up hate against Americans and possibly send coded messages to his followers.
Now, though, U.S. and British officials say bin Laden's statements are so extreme that they have propaganda value for the anti-terrorism coalition.
The Sunday Telegraph of London reported this weekend that a videotape seen by one of its reporters in the Middle East shows bin Laden saying that the Sept. 11 hijackers were "blessed by Allah to destroy America's economic and military landmarks."
"If avenging the killing of our people is terrorism, then history should be a witness that we are terrorists," bin Laden is quoted as saying. "Yes, we kill their innocents, and this is legal religiously and logically. . . . We will not stop killing them and whoever supports them."
Alastair Campbell, director of communications at 10 Downing Street, told reporters yesterday that a videotape also shows bin Laden calling it a "top duty priority" to kill Jews.
"I think it's time we gave a broad airing to some of the statements he has been making," Campbell said. "He has made a number of self-incriminatory statements about September 11th. He has made a number of genocidal statements against Jews and Americans."
The release of the new information is being coordinated by the Coalition Information Centers. They are run by Bush's counselor, Karen Hughes, and White House communications director Dan Bartlett in conjunction with British officials.
The U.S. branch of the information center consists of about 25 officials, three of them British, working in the Indian Treaty Room of the Eisenhower Executive Office Building. The British arm of the center also has about 25 employees, two of them from the United States. 
This week, the White House plans to name an official as its representative to a new Pakistan office of the information center.