President Bush turns his attention today to preparations for a crucial summit with Russian President Vladimir Putin after a weekend of diplomacy and tough words on the war on terrorism at the United Nations.
On Sunday, Bush paid tribute to military veterans at a prayer breakfast and marked 2 months since the Sept. 11 attacks with a visit to the World Trade Center rubble.
"The evil ones have roused a mighty nation, a mighty land," he said at the prayer breakfast. "And for however long it takes, I am determined that we will prevail."
In a blunt speech Saturday to the U.N. General Assembly, Bush said, "Every nation has a stake in this cause." He demanded that countries do more to root out terrorists and block their sources of money.
"Some governments still turn a blind eye to terrorists, hoping the threat will pass them by. They are mistaken," he said. Aides said his warnings were aimed at Iraq, Lebanon, Syria and Iran. It was Bush's first trip to the United Nations. The meeting had been set for Sept. 24 but was postponed by the attacks. Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat called the speech "important, positive and constructive."
In meetings beginning Tuesday in Washington and later at Bush's ranch in Crawford, Texas, Bush and Putin may finalize an agreement allowing the United States to develop and test a missile-defense shield. They are expected to reach an understanding without amending or nullifying the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, which bars national defenses. The presidents also are expected to announce plans to cut their nuclear arsenals to about 2,000 warheads each. Currently, the United States has about 7,000, Russia about 6,000.

Pakistani leader Pervez Musharraf, a key U.S. ally in its military campaign against Afghanistan's Taliban regime, pledged support for the U.S. campaign after meeting privately with Bush. Bush announced a $1 billion aid package for Pakistan and praised Musharraf, the target of anti-war demonstrations at home. "He is secure, and I think he has been a very, very effective leader," Secretary of State Colin Powell said Sunday on NBC's Meet the Press .
Bush tried to mollify both sides in the Middle East conflict. In a reference to Palestinian-linked terrorism, he called for an end to "incitement, violence and terror," a statement applauded by Israel. But he also called for creation of an independent Palestinian state.
Bush's words on the Mideast were significant. The United States is "working toward the day when two states Israel and Palestine live peacefully together within secure and recognized borders as called for by the Security Council resolutions," he told the General Assembly. Until Saturday, US presidents had referred to a "Palestinian state," but none had ever used the name "Palestine" except in reference to the British-controlled territory that existed before Israel was established in 1948.
For Israel, the name raises concerns that it implies a Palestinian right to all the pre-1948 territory, including Israel.
French Foreign Minister Hubert Vedrine praised Bush for the mention but criticized him for not making time to meet Arafat. "On the Middle East, I'm sorry to see there is a missed opportunity on both the human and the political level," Vedrine said.
Powell was to meet with Arafat later Sunday.
Bush meets in Washington today with former South African president Nelson Mandela.