The mission to recover remains from a sunken Russian nuclear submarine has turned up a second note on a sailor's body, Deputy Prime Minister Ilya Klebanov said Wednesday, according to the Interfax news agency. 
The note was written shortly after the submarine Kursk sank to the bottom of the Barents Sea on Aug. 12, crippled by explosions, with 118 men aboard, Klebanov told the commission investigating the sinking, the report said. 
It was not clear if the note contained information that would help determine the cause of the accident. But, like a previous note found on a sailor's body, it gives a terse description of the trapped sailors' desperation. 
"The general feeling is bad ... the pressure is increasing ... we can't last more than a day," the note says in part, according to Interfax. 
The note was found on the body of a sailor in the submarine's stern compartment, where the other note also was recovered. That note told of how 23 sailors had crowded into the compartment but were unable to get out the compartment's escape hatch. 
Klebanov said that pictures taken of the submarine during the operation to recover bodies has produced new evidence supporting the theory that the accident was caused by a collision with another vessel, possibly a foreign one, news reports said. 
The evidence includes videotape footage showing a dent in the submarine's upper section, he said. But Klebanov said other possible causes of the accident are being considered and that no final determination had yet been made. 
Russian officials have said the disaster was most likely caused by a collision, pointing to the presence of foreign military vessels in the Barents Sea during the military exercises in which the Kursk was taking part. 
Both Britain and the United States had submarines in the Barents Sea, but deny their vessels were in the area of the Kursk. Other observers have said the sinking most likely was caused by a torpedo exploding in a tube. 
The sinking was a trauma for Russia, both because the demise of one of its most modern vessels underlined the cash-strapped Navy's troubles and because of the government's slow and apparently confused response. 
Russia held off for days on accepting foreign offers of help even as its own divers struggled ineffectually to open the Kursk's escape hatch. Norwegian divers eventually opened it within hours of arriving on the scene, but found the submarine filled with water. 
Only 12 bodies have been recovered and further attempts were called off due to risks to the divers from mangled metal and darkness inside the submarine. 
The commission investigating the accident will decide if recovery efforts will continue. 
President Vladimir Putin, subject to fierce criticism after an initial slow reaction to the accident, had promised that all bodies would be retrieved before the vessel is raised next year. 
The first note found on the body of a victim, that of Dmitry Kolesnikov, state that at least 23 sailors survived for a time in the Kursk's rearmost ninth section after the accident. 
That overturned official assurances that all on board had died immediately after the explosions. 
Copyright 2000 CBS Worldwide Inc. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. The Associated Press and Reuters Limited contributed to this report.