"It's simply beautiful," said Elaine Busch, a graphic designer from San Francisco. "I'm a PC person, but I think I'm going to get one." 
Tim Bajarin, president of market research firm Creative Strategies , and someone not inclined to hyperbole, predicted the new iMac will become the best-selling computer of all time. 
Bajarin predicted Apple will sell 12 million of the new machines in the next three years. Over the last three years, Apple sold 6 million of the original iMacs, which makes it one of the best-selling computers ever. 
"Apple has another hit on its hands," Bajaran said. 
"The new iMac is an excellent product, in our opinion, and Apple may have scored a hit with its design," echoed Merrill Lynch analyst Steven Fortuna in a note to investors. "Unlike the failed G4 Cube, the new iMac is affordable ($1,299 to $1,799) and aimed at a clear target audience (consumers)." 
At first, Macworld attendees didn't appear to warm to the machine's radical design. When Apple's CEO Steve Jobs revealed the machine during his keynote speech on Monday, the applause was polite but muted. You could almost hear a collective "huh?" from the crowd. 
But after Jobs showed off some of its features and played a short introductory video, the crowd really began to warm to the new iMac's simple yet unfamiliar design. 
"People really seem to like it," said the machine's designer Jonathan Ive, who was walking the Macworld show floor on Tuesday. "I'm so glad. I wasn't sure they would." 
Ive agreed that people took a little time to warm to the machine, with its circular base and angle-poise mounted LCD screen. He said it was as though people needed a little time to familiarize themselves with the unfamiliar. Ive said the design was really very logical, but took quite a long time to figure out because nothing like it had been imagined before. It wasn't until after it had been created that it became obvious that was the way it should be. 
Have a comment on this article? Send it . 
Printing? Use this version.