Although it has mounted cumulative cash losses of $139 million, the 3-year-old company is expecting sales to rise as it gains a following overseas and among small businesses. 
What's more, the company's status as a preferred payment method on eBay auctions gives it ties to one of the Internet's most established success stories. 
This being 2002, however -- and a period in which ambitious Internet startups are virtually absent from the lineup of companies launching initial public offerings -- market-watchers are scratching their heads in wonderment at how PayPal made it onto the list. 
"It's a classic dot-com of the past. Fast-growing revenues and losses to match," said John Fitzgibbon, editor of IPODesktop and a former IPO syndicate manager. 
Disproving the skeptics, the Palo Alto company is preparing to launch an offering as early as Wednesday on the Nasdaq exchange. The company -- which provides a system for sending money by e-mail -- says it plans to use the money to buy equipment, improve processing of payments and expand overseas. 
PayPal is planning to offer 5.4 million shares for between $12 and $14 apiece -- a mid-size offering by Nasdaq standards. But Wall Street will be watching closely to see if it takes off at a time when most recent successful IPO candidates have come from the biotech, pharmaceutical and health-care industries. 
Despite the fact that it looks like an e-fish out of water, Fitzgibbon predicts that PayPal will see some small gains in first-day trading. He attributes this forecast less to the fundamentals of the company than to the assumption that the investment banks underwriting the offering, led by Salomon Smith Barney, have done their research. 
"It's quite costly to file. They wouldn't go to this expense unless they thought they could pull it off," he said. 
Looking at PayPal's history, it's also worth noting that the company has a record of pulling off what rivals have failed to accomplish. 
In the industry in which PayPal competes, referred to by analysts as "online alternative payments," the field is littered with promising startups that failed to capitalize on plans for revolutionizing the mechanisms of money transfer. 
The list ranges from experimental online currencies, like Beenz, Flooz and Cybergold, to electronic cash offerings like DigiCash. Entrepreneurial visions have largely wound up in bankruptcy. 
James Van Dyke, a financial services analyst at Jupiter Media Metrix, goes so far as to call PayPal the "only success story" in the alternative payment business. More than any other factor, he credits PayPal's rise to its popularity among eBay auction patrons. 
Have a comment on this article? Send it . 
Printing? Use this version.