Ted Koppel has gone on the offensive in an effort to save his embattled program, arguing in an op-ed piece today that the war on terrorism makes "Nightline" more relevant than ever and accusing ABC executives of "malicious" behavior.

"I would argue that in these times, when homeland security is an ongoing concern, when another terrorist attack may, at any time, shatter our sense of normalcy, when U.S. troops are engaged in Afghanistan, the Philippines, Yemen and Georgia, when the likelihood of military action against Iraq is growing ? when, in short, the regular and thoughtful analysis of national and foreign policy is more essential than ever ? it is, at best, inappropriate and, at worst, malicious to describe what my colleagues and I are doing as lacking relevance.
"There are excellent business reasons for the Disney Co. to pursue the Letterman program. But when 'Nightline' is gone from the ABC schedule, and should the occasion arrive that our work might again seem relevant to the anonymous executive, it will not then be possible to reconstitute what is so easily destroyed."
The Times piece marks the only departure from a calculated strategy of silence by Koppel and his team since word leaked Thursday night that ABC is in serious negotiations to land Letterman. They believe the media debate is playing out in their favor.
For the first time yesterday, there was talk that Letterman, 54, might not replace Koppel, 62, after all. Two CBS executives predicted the late-night comic will stick with the network because he doesn't want to be portrayed as the man who toppled Ted Koppel.
"We all use others at contract time to jack up the price," said ABC correspondent Sam Donaldson. "There's nothing un-American about that. CBS has taken him for granted and suddenly realizes it can't do that."
At the same time, a senior ABC News staffer said, top Disney and ABC executives "miscalculated" by underestimating the wave of criticism that would follow their dismissive comments about "Nightline." "They got a little bit carried away with their trash talking," the staffer said.
Even if Letterman stays put, those in the news division at ABC believe substantial damage has already been done by the network's criticism of "Nightline."
"People would have understood the economic argument," said one ABC News staffer, who like most of those interviewed declined to be quoted by name because of the sensitivity of the situation. "The hurtful part of it is being told you're not relevant anymore."
"Everyone understands you've got to negotiate with David Letterman," a network insider said. "They're just furious about how Ted was thrashed."
In private, Koppel "is very calm and measured," said Donaldson, who has spoken with him several times. "Ted does not go off half-cocked. He wants to continue doing his program. He's also a realist."
Fences would clearly have to be mended. If "Nightline" stays on the schedule, said the senior staffer, "the Disney people will have to do some public talking to convince people they really believe in the broadcast."
"Nightline" has been flooded with supportive e-mails ? more than 3,200 by yesterday morning ? and is now asking its fans to send electronic messages to ABC's audience relations unit. "The support from all of you has been very gratifying, and we will forward on all of those e-mails," Leroy Sievers, executive producer of "Nightline," said in his electronic newsletter.
What might seem like a typical battle of the network stars ? replacing one multimillionaire with another ? has exploded into a media morality play in which Disney and ABC are being painted as caring little about news. Some ABC executives have said they respect Koppel and would like to move him to prime time ? a move he has long resisted ? but they have portrayed "Nightline" as an aging franchise that has lost its vitality.
The result is that Koppel has become a symbol. As USA Today put it yesterday: "If 'Nightline's' venerable Ted Koppel isn't safe, is anyone in broadcast news?"
's Bob Schieffer said on "Face the Nation" that "Nightline" is "as good as any broadcast on television, even if it is on ABC, which is why I don't get why the ABC brass wants to dump it. As I understand it, they say it doesn't attract enough younger viewers who buy things. So who is it that buys all these luxury cars and mutual funds? Teenagers?"
The average age of "Nightline" viewers is 50, the Letterman average about 46. But that gap can translate into millions of dollars in greater revenue from advertisers who prize a younger audience. That's why "Nightline" gets little credit for staying competitive in the ratings with Letterman's "Late Show," though behind Jay Leno's "Tonight Show" on NBC.
News President David Westin told his staff Friday that the chances of a Letterman defection were 50-50.
Some ABC News staffers insist Westin has been put in an untenable position. Since Westin wasn't told of the plan to lure Letterman for the 11:35 p.m. time slot, he appears less influential than his predecessor, Roone Arledge. But if Westin had been informed in advance, he would have been unable to tell his staff for fear of upsetting the secret Letterman talks.
As the dispute raged on yesterday, Letterman found a way to stay out of the limelight. He went on vacation.
Staff writer Lisa de Moraes contributed to this report.