Shares in U.S. aircraft manufacturer Lockheed Martin Corp. ( LMT.N ) surged in Europe to trade 14 percent above Friday's U.S. close, after the company won a major U.S. contract to build fighter jets. 
Dealers said shares of Boeing Co. ( BA.N ), which lost out in the deal, were down about seven percent from Friday's close. 
Lockheed shares traded on the Instinet electronic brokerage at $57.00, up from their regular close of $49.92 and up from $52.00 in after-hours trading on Wall Street on Friday. Dealers said they eased back after their initial urge, and at 1100 GMT Lockheed stock was hovering at $56.60. Trading had been heavy. 
The U.S. Defense Department said late Friday it had picked Lockheed to build a new Joint Strike Fighter, in what promises to be the richest defense contract ever. 
Lockheed beat Boeing Co. ( BA.N ) in the contest to build the next-generation fighter jet for an estimated contract value of well over $200 billion, if all planned orders are filled. 
Boeing shares fell to $35.00 in after-hours trading on Friday and continued to hover around that level in Europe, down from their regular close of $37.68. 
Dealers said there was limited activity for other U.S. shares in Europe. 
U.S. stock futures contracts dipped, as major European indices slipped and investors were worried key U.S. economic and corporate reports this week will be weak. 
The S P 500 December futures contract was down 5 points at 1,097 points. 
Shares in energy trading giant Enron Corp. ( ENE.N ) traded at $15.75, from a close of $15.50, after the Wall Street Journal reported Enron is negotiating with banks for a new credit line of between $1 billion and $2 billion. 
General Motors Corp ( GM.N ) and EchoStar Communications Corp ( DISH.O ) were untraded, despite the weekend news that GM had sold its satellite television unit for $26 billion to EchoStar. 
EchoStar is offering cash and shares to buy Hughes Electronics Corp GMH.N. , which will give it a U.S. pay television behemoth covering over 16.7 million subscribers or 17 percent of the U.S. market. 
Technology stocks showed little movement away from Friday's closing prices. One dealer said Microsoft ( MSFT.O ) nudged 10 cents above its $62.20 close, while Cisco Systems ( CSCO.O ) and Intel Corp. ( INTC.O ) were both down 5 cents from their close. REUTERS REUTERS