Andrew Dusing, a 25-year-old computer technician who lives in upstate New York, has fashioned chairs, tables and other furniture out of dozen Apple boxes and their Styrofoam inserts. 
Dusing, who works in the graphics department of Cazenovia College , recently outfitted one of the college's computer labs with dozens of new Apple machines. When he finished setting up the computers, he couldn't bear to part with the boxes. 
"I really didn't want to throw them away," he said. "So I made furniture out of them. Sure, it saves money but it's because I really like to do it. It's about thinking different. What could I make today?" 
Dusing turned the boxes into a dining table, a set of chairs and some CD racks. He even made a couch. 
"You can sit on it," he said, "but it's not all that comfortable." 
To further show off his packing material passion, Dusing made a pair of giant, bulky animal sculptures -? a sofa-sized rhino and a giraffe that stands 6 feet tall. 
"I wanted to make some animals whose coloring reflected the pictures on the boxes," he said. "The boxes were turquoise and blue and white. I used those elements to my advantage." 
Dusing made the giraffe out of packing tape and Elmer's glue; but as a result, it's starting to fall apart. The rhino is made from dry wall screws and industrial-strength epoxy glue. 
Dusing designed them by drawing a silhouette of the animal and dividing it into geometric shapes -? triangles, rectangles and squares, which could be made out of cardboard. 
Dusing was inspired by the huge topiary sculptures at Walt Disney World in Florida and originally planned to put the cardboard animals in his mother's front garden. 
"The neighbors have all these dopey ornaments on their lawns," he said. "But my mom wasn't too keen on having these giant lawn ornaments." 
The sculptures were exhibited at an art show at the college and received a positive response. One attendee suggested Dusing could sell them on eBay for $5,000 apiece, but he opted to keep them, despite the tight quarters in his apartment. 
Dusing plans to make more animal sculptures, perhaps an elephant or a gorilla. He is also hoping to get his hands on some old Apple boxes from the 1980s that featured the rainbow-colored Apple logo. 
If he gets enough of the old boxes, he'll make a '57 Chevy out of them. "They're classic boxes so why not make a classic car?" he said. 
Dusing also wants to make more furniture. He needs a rack for his collection of videocassettes. "I'll never need to buy furniture again," he said. "Whenever a need arises, I know I can make it out of cardboard. I just wish I had more boxes." 
Have a comment on this article? Send it . 
Printing? Use this version.