A week spent talking about the need to play hard early in games and bounce back from nasty losses ended with the Washington Capitals finally doing both. The Capitals dominated Anaheim in the first period last night and controlled the duration of the game, subduing the Mighty Ducks, 4-1, before 17,298 at MCI Center.
Washington won for just the second time in 10 games and played its most complete hockey this month, rebounding from successive defeats to Ottawa and Philadelphia during which the club was outscored 16-5. Another loss would have been devastating; the impetus for victory came early. The Capitals scored first for just the sixth time this season and were dedicated to their defensive system for the remainder of the contest, a rarity the last few weeks.
"We had a great meeting today and were told to relax and enjoy ourselves," winger Chris Simon (one goal) said. "Basically, just shut up and play the game. We know what we have to do, we're an experienced team and this is a step in the right direction tonight. Hopefully, a couple of months from now we'll look back and laugh at the way we played early in the year."
The Capitals would not relinquish all hopes of a victory in the first five minutes last night, that much was certain after the game's first shift. There was noticeably more vigor and effort from the club after getting outscored 8-1 in the first period of their last two humbling losses (23-13 on the season), a development personified by Peter Bondra's charge to the crease that resulted in the first power play of the game.
Washington worked the puck smoothly on the power play. Winger Ulf Dahlen capped the nice work by slipping a backhander to the net which Jaromir Jagr pushed into the vacant side of the net three minutes in. Matt Pettinger made it 2-0 five minutes later, scorching the puck past Jean-Sebastien Giguere's glove, striking the net where the crossbar and post intersect. Pettinger had scored for the second time in three games after failing to score in his first 18 NHL contests. That outburst thrust him to sixth on the team in goals, a reflection of the lack of balanced production this season.
The Ducks, coming off a tough loss at Columbus on Friday night, converted their only real scoring chance of the period, however, and made a game of it. Capitals center Andrei Nikolishin fanned on a skipping rebound in the slot with the team playing four-on-four and Anaheim raced down the ice on a three-on-two. Samuel Pahlsson took a pass and whisked a low shot into the near side; goaltender Olaf Kolzig never saw the shot through traffic.
Washington's onslaught continued in the second period, but the scoring stalled. Hard work begot more power-play opportunities: The Capitals enjoyed the game's first five power plays -- they entered last night in an 0-for-13 rut -- including a five-on-three for 73 seconds midway through the game. That resulted in no goals and just two shots on goal.
The Capitals were vulnerable -- they have been a fragile team lately with little confidence -- and needed an insurance goal before the second intermission. Center Adam Oates provided that, notching his first goal since March 7, a span of 33 games, and finishing with four points. Ulf Dahlen ripped a no-look pass through the crease on the power play and Oates slammed it in from the far post late in the period.
Oates's best work, however, was yet to come. Anaheim had a two-man advantage for 74 seconds as the second period expired. Oates and defensemen Sylvain Cote and Frantisek Kucera were the on the ice for the entire span, using smarts and hustle to secure Washington's lead.
"The penalty killing was excellent," Coach Ron Wilson said. "We killed of off a five-on-three and a number of penalties. They're turning point kills."
Kolzig was brilliant as well, swatting away Paul Kariya's shot while on his stomach, one of several nimble reaction saves he produced in the clutch.
"That was great," Kolzig said. "We got away from [their defensive system] and I didn't know if we could turn it around just like that after being humbled the way we were the last two games. I thought it might take the four days [until the next game] to get the system back, but the guys showed it's our heads. We just need to apply it and that's what we did tonight."
Capitals Notes: Veteran defenseman Joe Reekie, off to a slow start, was a healthy scratch last night despite a slew of key injuries. Wilson opted to dress career minor leaguer Dean Melanson and Kucera, a journeyman playing just his second game since being summoned from the Czech League. Defenseman Brendan Witt did not return from western Canada, where he had attended a funeral, in time for the game. Defenseman Ken Klee returned after missing three games with a rib injury. . . Wingers Chris Corrinet and Dmitri Khristich were also scratched. Khristich cleared waivers yesterday -- as expected given his ineffective play and $3.2 million salary. The Capitals do not plan to send Khristich to the minors but hoped another team might gamble on him. . . . Sources said the Capitals have no trades brewing for a defenseman and do not anticipate being able to acquire someone of quality at that position. . . . Rookie enforcer Stephen Peat had the finest bout of his young NHL career last night, pounding Kevin Sawyer with a flurry of lefts in the first period, enlivening the crowd and Washington's bench.