A look at elections and ballot measures around the country Tuesday.
San Francisco voters were to decide two proposals to acquire local operation of Pacific Gas and Electric Co. and provide power to city. PG E spent more than $1 million fighting the measures.
San Francisco voters overwhelmingly approved a $100 million bond issue to pay for solar power in public buildings. They were also deciding whether to authorize the board of supervisors to underwrite renewable energy projects in homes and businesses without voter approval.
Voters in Carson, a Los Angeles suburb, decided whether to secede from troubled Los Angeles Unified School District. With 772,000 children, district is nation's second-largest after New York.
Voters rejected a proposal to let the state spend $50 million to create prototype for monorail that would link Denver and Rocky Mountain resorts.
Hartford Democrat Eddie Perez, community activist and ex-Trinity College official, won election as Hartford's first Hispanic mayor.
Three people vied to succeed Waterbury's Republican Mayor Philip Giordano. He had planned not to seek re-election and is now jailed on federal charges of forcing sex on minors.
A recount was under way to decide who would face former Mayor Maurice Ferre in a runoff next Tuesday: Manny Diaz, an attorney who represented the Miami relatives of Elian Gonzalez, or incumbent Mayor Joe Carollo.
Miami Beach voters decided whether unmarried city employees with partners, heterosexual or gay, qualify for domestic partnership benefits.
Robb Pitts and Shirley Franklin were front-runners in field of five in nonpartisan race to succeed term-limited Atlanta Mayor Bill Campbell.
About 50 voters in newly incorporated Vedic City elect Bob Wynne, running unopposed for mayor. Wynne helped found community of followers of Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, who brought Transcendental Meditation to Iowa.
Portland residents voted on nonbinding resolution on whether city should endorse universal health care. Measure drew drawn fierce opposition from health insurers, who have mounted television ad campaign.
Boston Mayor Thomas Menino easily won re-election against City Councilor Peggy Davis-Mullen in nonpartisan contest.
Kwame Kilpatrick, state House Democratic leader, and City Council President Gil Hill vied to succeed Detroit Mayor Dennis Archer, who is pursuing other interests. Race is nonpartisan.
Gay bias referendums in three cities: Huntington Woods voters decided whether to keep ban on anti-gay bias, which city commission adopted this year. Kalamazoo and Traverse City voters asked whether to amend city charters to bar officials from approving such protection for gays.
In Dearborn, 16-year incumbent Mayor Michael Guido defeated Abed Hammoud, an assistant Wayne County prosecutor. After Sept. 11, Hammoud, a Lebanese immigrant in a community where 20 percent of the 98,000 residents are Arab-American, put out flier denouncing the terror attacks and proclaiming pride in his U.S. citizenship.
Political novice R.T. Rybak defeated Minneapolis Mayor Sharon Sayles Belton, city's first black and first female chief executive, in nonpartisan race.
Seeking to follow outgoing St. Paul Mayor Norm Coleman, who plans to run for U.S. Senate, were state Sen. Randy Kelly and City Councilman Jay Benanav.
A field of 14 rivals vied to replace Lee County Sheriff Harold Ray Presley, cousin of Elvis Presley, who was killed in shootout. In the field was Harold Presley's brother, Larry W. Presley, a retired Tupelo police officer.
Interim Hinds County District Attorney Faye Peterson sought to become state's first elected black female prosecutor. She was named to fill vacancy when Ed Peters retired. State law requires a nonpartisan election to complete his term. Her opponent was former assistant district attorney Bryan Buckley.
Jim McGreevey coasted past GOP challenger Bret Schundler, becoming the state's first Democratic governor since 1989. McGreevey succeeds acting Gov. Donald DiFrancesco, finishing Christie Whitman's term after President Bush put her in charge of Environmental Protection Agency.
All 120 seats in Republican-controlled state Assembly and Senate up for election. In each house, Republicans hold 10-seat majority.
Candidates include Lou Gallagher, Democrat and Navy SEAL reservist. Since he left Oct. 9 for a covert mission, his wife, Karen, has waged his bid to unseat Republican state Sen. Diane Allen of Florence.
Atlantic City Mayor James Whelan outpolled City Councilman Lorenzo Langford 4,202 to 4,145. But Langford said that more than 1,500 unopened absentee ballots would propel him past Whelan. The count was to continue Wednesday.
Billionaire media mogul Michael Bloomberg, a Republican, beats veteran consumer activist Mark Green, a Democrat, in the race to succeed term-limited Mayor Rudolph Giuliani.
Charlotte Mayor Pat McCrory, a Republican, defeated former City Council member Ella Scarborough. McCrory also soundly defeated the Democrat in 1999.
In Raleigh, Republican incumbent Paul Coble conceded to ex-councilman Charles Meeker, a Democrat, in mayoral runoff. Only 962 votes separated the two, and absentee and provisional ballots remained to be counted.
Jane Campbell, a county commissioner, became Cleveland's first female mayor. She turned back Raymond Pierce, a deputy assistant education secretary in the Clinton administration, in nonpartisan contest.
Incumbent Charlie Luken defeated challenger Courtis Fuller to become Cincinnati's first directly elected mayor in 76 years. Luken weathered criticism of his handling of riots last spring sparked by the shooting of an unarmed black man by a white policeman.
Pittsburgh Mayor Tom Murphy, a Democrat, easily won third term against Republican James Carmine, a philosophy professor.
Philadelphia District Attorney Lynne Abraham, once called "America's Deadliest D.A." because of her zeal for the death penalty, won a landslide victory over three little-known challengers.
In York, three candidates each hoped to succeed Mayor Charlie Robertson, who's been charged with murder in black woman's death during 1969 race riots.
Defying state law and court saying he can't be mayor of Scranton, convicted felon Robert Bolus, a Republican, opposed Democratic Councilman Chris Doherty in race for mayor. Bolus, who says he's innocent, has record that includes receiving stolen machinery for his trucking firm.
Rhyming Judge J. Michael Eakin, a Republican, ran for state Supreme Court against fellow Superior Court colleague Judge Kate Ford Elliott, a Democrat, to replace retiring Chief Justice John P. Flaherty Jr.
Eakin sometimes delivers opinions in verse, like this on divorcing couple's dispute over prenuptial pact: "A deal is a deal, if fairly undertaken, and we find disclosure was fair and unshaken."
Spartanburg Mayor James Talley sought third term against literally everyone else in town. He botched petition to get his name on the ballot, meaning election depended entirely on write-in votes. Any of city's 23,000 registered voters could win.
Former Austin city councilman Gus Garcia trounces a large field of challengers to become the first elected Hispanic mayor of Texas' capital city. Garcia will serve out the unexpired term of former Mayor Kirk Watson, who resigned to run for Texas attorney general.
Houston Mayor Lee Brown, city's first black chief executive, sought third term in nonpartisan contest against five challengers.
Houston voters also decided ballot proposal to bar city from giving benefits to gay domestic partners.
Voters statewide were to decide 19 constitutional amendments, including proposal to create Texas Mobility Fund. It would let Texas borrow money for new and improved roads needed for growing population. Separate measure would build roads in poor communities on Mexico border known as "colonias."
Voters approved a constitutional change that would require the governor to call a special legislative session to appoint presidential electors under certain circumstances. The change was inspired by last year's close presidential election.
Democrat Mark Warner defeated Republican Mark Earley in the race to succeed term-limited Gov. Jim Gilmore. Warner is the first Democrat to win a statewide election in Virginia since 1994.
All 100 seats in the House of Delegates are up for election; Republicans hold two-seat edge.
Rivals in Seattle's nonpartisan mayoral race were County Councilman Greg Nickels and City Attorney Mark Sidran.
Statewide citizen Initiative 773 would raise tobacco tax to $1.42 1/2 a pack, nation's highest. Another proposal, Initiative 747, would prevent property taxes from rising more than 1 percent a year unless voters approved larger increase.
2001 The Associated Press