As America wages its war on terrorism, history will judge the nation by how it defends equality at home and human rights abroad, former Vice President Al Gore said Saturday. 
"Political, religious and economic freedom represent the way we as human beings are intended to live our lives together," Gore told a New Hampshire Democratic Party fund-raiser. "We will never turn our backs on those values." 
Gore, paying a visit to the state that hosts the nation's first presidential primary, did not say if he would run again in 2004, despite the prodding of 500 guests, some of whom chanted "Gore in four." 
"I'm not gonna respond to that, but I appreciate the encouragement," said Gore, who lost to President Bush in last year's election. "I have not decided what I am going to do in the future." 
The terrorist attacks underscore the need for America to promote its values of freedom and peace throughout the world, he said. 
"It's been a long time since we've faced a situation where we've been under attack from a group that just wants to kill Americans," he said. "It really challenges our traditional way of thinking about these things. 
Gore said the message of Afghanistan's ruling Taliban party is one of terror and injustice and discrimination, a society in which women must hide their faces and are not allowed to go to the doctor. 
"It's not really about religion," Gore said. "My religious tradition says that by their fruits, you shall know them. Well, we've seen their fruits, a devastated land where people are suffering from violence and discrimination of all kinds." 
Gore praised the dedication of firefighters and police officers who continue to risk their lives despite losing hundreds of colleagues in the September 11 attacks in New York and Washington. 
"They were the ones going up the stairs when the rest of the people were trying to escape," Gore said. "What tremendous courage." 
Gore also said it is important for Americans to stand behind Bush during this time of crisis, and for Democrats to continue the debate at home over the economy and social reform. 
Saturday's $75-a-plate Jefferson-Jackson Dinner was expected to raise more than $20,000 for the party, officials said. 
Gore kept a low-profile in the days leading up to the event as he toured the state and met with party members. 
He said that if he runs for president again, there's at least one thing he'll change: "If I had it to do over again I would have kissed Tipper longer at the convention." 
Copyright 2001 The Associated Press . All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.