Russia withdrew on Friday a threat to leave the Salt Lake City Olympics after an emergency meeting between International Olympic Committee (IOC) president Jacques Rogge and Russian team leaders.
In the biggest political crisis to hit the Olympic movement since the Cold War, the Russians had threatened on Thursday to quit the Winter Games prematurely because of what they perceived was bad and biased judging.
"The national team will stay," Russia's IOC vice-president Vitaly Smirnov told Reuters. "It will take part until the very end. Russia will take part in all events, in all competitions and will take part in the closing ceremony."
Smirnov's assurance followed a meeting with Rogge at a luxury mansion in the exclusive suburb of Cottonwood and which brought a speedy resolution to the crisis.
He said Rogge had told him all the Russian complaints would be examined.
Russia, fuming over earlier decisions they believed had gone against them at the Salt Lake City Games, gave 24 hours notice on Thursday of their intention to pull out of the Olympics unless their concerns were addressed.
The Russians have filed a number of protests since the IOC and the ISU took the unprecedented step of awarding a second gold medal in the figure skating pairs competition to Canadian duo Jamie Sale and David Pelletier, who had finished second.
The decision followed a public outcry and a four-day North American media campaign to overturn the original result in which Russian pair Yelena Berezhnaya and Anton Sukharulidze won the gold on a 5-4 split vote. A French judge was later suspended for misconduct.
The Russians had suffered another reverse on Friday when an appeal against Irina Slutskaya's second place in the women's figure skating was rejected.
Russia filed a protest against Thursday's figure skating result with team spokesman Rudolf Nezvegsky saying Slutskaya had skated as well as, if not better, than American gold medallist Sarah Hughes in the free programme.
Leonid Tygachev, the president of the Russian Olympic Committee, said the Russian figure skating federation and the National Olympic Committee had sent a protest to the International Skating Union (ISU).
"Maybe there should be a second gold medal because this is a real champion," Tygachev told Reuters television. "We have not got an answer yet but we will be having a meeting today with Jacques Rogge.
"We were impressed by the American figure skaters...but two of them made small mistakes and, of course, Slutskaya was the best, better than the young American skater."
Speaking to reporters in the Kremlin, Russian President Vladimir Putin took an unusual swipe at 59-year-old Rogge who was elected into office last July in Moscow, replacing Juan Antonio Samaranch who had been at the top of the IOC for 21 years.
"Not the last reason is the change of generations in the International Olympic Committee," Putin said.
"Juan Antonio Samaranch has gone and Jacques Rogge has taken his place. Regrettably for the new leadership, the first time is bound to be a flop."
He added: "Let us see how the Olympic Games end. Let us hope that the IOC leadership will manage to solve these difficulties."
The Russian team were to meet the United States later on Friday in the ice hockey semifinal.