Bulgaria's new Socialist president, triumphant after his apparent victory in a difficult election battle, pledged to continue efforts to win the country membership in the European Union and NATO.
Final results from Sunday's runoff election were expected later Monday, but provisional results gave Georgi Parvanov, the leader of the opposition Socialist Party, 53.3 percent of the vote compared to 46.7 percent for incumbent Petar Stoyanov.
Turnout was 54.5 percent, the Central Election Commission said.
In Bulgaria, the presidency is a largely ceremonial position, with real power resting with the prime minister and parliament, but the office still carries considerable moral authority and legislative veto power.
Addressing a news conference, Parvanov pledged to work "for a stronger role of the state" in alleviating economic burdens and to strengthen ties with the rest of Europe.
"I will work for Bulgaria's strategic choice -- Bulgaria's membership in the European Union and NATO," he said.
Parvanov, a 44-year-old historian, surpassed by far the popularity of his party, which garnered only 18 percent of the vote in parliamentary elections in June.
He was also backed by a party representing Bulgaria's 800,000 ethnic Turks, as well as by several Gypsy organizations and retirees' unions.
Parvanov's lead reflected a growing demand for change among Bulgarians disillusioned by a dozen years of economic hardship following the fall of communism.
It also signaled discontent with the pace of reforms implemented by current Prime Minister Simeon Saxcoburggotski, the former king, whose party overwhelmingly won the June elections.
Simeon had urged Bulgarians to vote for Stoyanov, but a number of his party's members disagreed. The Turks, who are a coalition partner of Simeon, also distanced themselves from his call.
Parvanov rose to the helm of his party in 1996, when mass street protests against economic mismanagement and rampant crime forced it out of power.
Under his leadership, the Socialists set out to reform themselves along the lines of West European Social Democrats. They also joined the consensus in Bulgaria toward joining NATO.
Parvanov, however, staunchly opposed NATO's air campaign against Yugoslavia in 1999, which Stoyanov supported.
Stoyanov, a 49-year-old lawyer, ran as an independent candidate. He had also the support of his center-right Union of Democratic Forces.