The Australian Government has boosted its military commitment to the U.S.-led attacks on Afghanistan and warned the public its troops would be involved in a long and dangerous campaign. 
Prime Minister John Howard on Wednesday committed more than 1,500 military personnel -- including elite Special Air Service (SAS) troops -- four fighter aircraft, three frigates and two refuelling aircraft to the campaign against terror. 
Australia was one of the first countries to offer military support to the U.S. following the Sept. 11 attacks. 
The first Australian troops are expected to begin heading towards Afghanistan within the next few days. 
"Our forces will be overseas fighting in our name within a very short period of time," Howard said. 
"It will not be an easy operation," he said, adding that the "possibility of deaths, the possibility of casualties is quite high." 
Howard said U.S. President George W. Bush telephoned him on Tuesday night to ask Australia to "activate" his pledge to contribute to the military operations, wire service Reuters reports. 
The Australian commitment detailed Wednesday is significantly larger than originally planned. 
It adds four FA-18A long-distance strike aircraft, an amphibious command ship and two additional frigates to earlier commitments of SAS troops, a frigate, two Orion surveillance planes and two Boeing refuelling aircraft. 
Australia offered the support under the 50-year-old ANZUS security pact between the United States, Australia and New Zealand. 
The Prime Minister said the military forces would be under the command of Australia's Chief of Defense Admiral Chris Barrie but the U.S. military was calling the overall shots. 
"The total number of deployed personnel will be 1,550," Howard said. 
"This marks of course a significant further stage in the involvement of Australia, Australian military personnel and the Australian people in this war against terrorism," Howard said. 
The increased military commitment was supported by Australia's Labor party opposition leader Kim Beazley. 
"This is an appropriate commitment and a significant one," Beazley said. 
Australians go to the polls on November 10 in an election in which both Howard and Beazley are promoting their defense and security credentials. 
It will be the first major national election to be held since the New York and Washington attacks.