Television sets will shrink to flat screens. Computers will fit into consumers' hands. Seamless Internet connection will happen from clothes, the car and the home. 
While devices continue the trend toward sleeker and smaller, the gadgets will also communicate with each other as well as the Internet, and they will perform additional tasks. 
"There will be major trends, and one is the power of storage being smaller and more impacting," Fasold said. "There will be different storage options -- for example, you could play hours and hours of music on the road and store those songs on a hard disk to listen to at home." 
Compaq, for example, will show its iPAQ Pocket PC taking photographs and making phone calls, doing much more than traditional PDA organizing tasks. The computer manufacturer also plans to unveil a new line of desktop computers and notebooks that include options to surf the Web wirelessly using Bluetooth or the 802.11 Ethernet standard. 
"With the advent of wireless infrastructure becoming more mature in the U.S., the wireless mobility capability is now in our industry," said Compaq spokesman Roger Frizzell. "That's where handhelds and devices come into play. You still have customers in the enterprise space that want traditional (desktop computer) products, but they want the wireless feature in them. From the consumer standpoint, one thing we'll be doing at CES is demonstrating that the Pocket PC can be a hub to connect to other digital devices." 
Even though the prices for desktop PCs have fallen dramatically to as low $400, Frizzell denied the home computer was a dying breed. He said it was simply "evolving" to become more compact, yet more powerful. 
"It's a powerful tool that can do a lot more than just data access," he said. 
But Frizzell acknowledged that the flourishing handheld devices have colored the computing landscape. The company's fastest growing computer the last two years has been the Compaq iPAQ , Frizzell said. 
So many people at the show are expected to tote devices such as the iPAQ that companies like Dockers and Scott eVest will be showing off clothing to accommodate the gadgets. 
"I haven't been (to CES) before," said Scott E. Jordan, chairman and CEO of Scott eVest, a manufacturer of vests with large seamless pockets. "I expect to see a lot of miniature devices. I expect to see a lot of mobile technology. I view the vest as a computer box." 
Panasonic, OnStar and Microsoft will be combining all these wired and wireless devices with entertainment equipment in digital home showcases. According to CEA's Fasold, consumers at the show will be able to "talk to the lighting with (their) home theater, which can also talk to the World Wide Web to download movies without having to talk to a PC." 
Microsoft's Bill Gates will kickstart CES Monday night with a demonstration of the AirPanel 150, a flat-panel wireless monitor from ViewSonic that allows users to carry it from room to room. The machine lets users pop the display out of a docking station and carry it around for conference room presentations, Web surfing and viewing DVD movies running from the desktop PC. 
will run until Friday. 
Have a comment on this article? Send it . 
Printing? Use this version.