A Web site which reputedly first brought together children's television icon Bert of "Sesame Street" fame and the world's most wanted man, Osama bin Laden, has been shut down by its creator. 
The site, operated by a Dutch man who identifies himself on his site only as "J-roen," carried the following message on Friday: "Due to the great amount of comments (both positive and negative) since a picture from this Web site was recently featured in a collage poster, I have decided to take this section of the site offline." 
The author did not respond to e-mails seeking comment. 
On the site was a spoof photo of Bert the Muppet appearing beside bin Laden, the prime suspect in the September 11 jetliner hijacking attacks in the United States. 
The image apparently was downloaded off the Internet along with other images of bin Laden and arranged together on to a montage placard. 
The placards have become a top seller on the streets of Bangladesh over the past week with anti-American protestors hoisting them at rallies. Photojournalists covering the demonstrations unwittingly captured the images and circulated them to newspapers and news Web sites. 
The posters showing a tiny Bert tucked between two images of bin Laden were held by seemingly unsuspecting demonstrators at rallies on October 5 and 9. 
John van der Lingen, an administrator for the Amsterdam-based Web firm that hosts the site, www.j-roen.net, said the site had received a record number of visitors in the past two days as media from around the world have reported on the satirical contribution to the war effort. 
"J-roen" has become something of an overnight celebrity this week courtesy of his Web site. 
The Bert-bin Laden duo was first spotted by Internet users earlier this week and the hunt was on to find the creator. 
On the Internet, Bert has become a celebrated parodied figure. A San Francisco-based artist created a "Bert is Evil" Web site in the mid 1990s. It shows the crabby, banana-shaped Muppet with famous figures throughout history. 
The artist Dino Ignacio grew tired of the site in 1998 and stopped working on it. But the momentum has carried on. 
Doctored photos of Bert appearing with Hitler and now bin Laden appear on spoof sites across the Internet. Ignacio has denied being the creator of Bert and bin Laden. 
Sesame Workshop, the New York-based creators of "Sesame Street," issued a statement on Thursday saying it would explore legal options "to stop this abuse or any similar abuses in the future."