Police chief Bernard Parks slammed the defendant in this city's next high-profile court drama as a terrorist disguising herself as a soccer mom Wednesday, just six weeks before the trial of former radical fugitive Sara Jane Olson. 
Olson is accused of planting bombs under police cars in Los Angeles 25 years ago as a member of the now-defunct Symbionese Liberation Army, the violent radical group famous for kidnapping newspaper heiress Patty Hearst and turning her into one of its "soldiers." 
Parks, at his monthly briefing with reporters, said people should not forget that Olson is accused of planting bombs under two patrol cars 25 years ago that could have killed and maimed people had they gone off. 
The chief, whose leadership has been tested during the city's worst-ever police corruption scandal, displayed a photograph of one of the bombs, which did not explode because of a design flaw, and said it was a "miracle" that the officers and others were not killed. 
"This is not a crime of trying to blow up police cars, this is a crime of trying to kill Los Angeles police officers," Parks said, adding that only the "quick reaction" by those cops saved their lives and the lives of innocent bystanders. 
Parks said the crimes should not be forgotten simply because Olson was "trying to remake herself into a Midwestern wife and actress (instead of) an SLA terrorist." 
In addition, the chief declared himself furious that Olson's Web site posted the names and addresses of a current and former Los Angeles police officers. 
Parks said he was "outraged" that the names and addresses of Officer John Hall and former Officer James Bryan whose squad car was targeted by one of the bombs were posted on the site, as part of a legal motion. 
He said the posting placed the two men and their families in danger and was evidence of Olson's "defiance" of the law. 
Earlier this month, Los Angeles Superior Court Judge James Ideman refused a request by prosecutors to raise Olson's bail because of the Internet posting, saying he had no evidence that she was personally responsible. 
Olson's San Francisco-based lead attorney, J. Tony Serra, was in court and could not be reached to respond on Parks' remarks. The organizers of the Web page did not immediately return calls seeking comment. 
Prosecutors say the former Kathleen Ann Soliah planted the bombs, which were packed with nails, in 1975 to avenge the deaths of six SLA members during a shootout with LAPD officers. 
She eluded police and spent nearly a quarter century on the lam, living much of that time in an ivy-covered home in St. Paul, Minn., married to an emergency room doctor, raising three daughters and being active in her church and local theater. 
After her arrest in June, 1999, she legally changed her name to her alias of Sara Jane Olson. She is scheduled to stand trial beginning January 8. 
The SLA is best known for kidnapping Hearst, who then joined the group and was convicted of helping them rob a bank, spending two years in prison before U.S. President Jimmy Carter granted her clemency. 
Prosecutors have said they will call Hearst as a witness at Olson's trial despite her stated reluctance. 
Grand jury transcripts in the case show there is little evidence left to link Olson to the long-ago bomb plot, and defense lawyers say there never was a case against her. But prosecutors say there is enough to go forward with a trial. 
Key witnesses have died, and some physical evidence is unavailable. 
Copyright 2000 Reuters Limited. All Rights Reserved.