SAN'A, Yemen -- Two new suspects have been arrested in the bombing of the USS Cole, Yemen's president said in an interview broadcast Sunday. 
But Yemen has not yet found evidence linking Saudi dissident Osama bin Laden to the October 12 Cole attack that killed 17 U.S. sailors. 
"They are Yemenis, among those that used to go to Afghanistan," President Ali Abdullah Saleh told the Arabic TV network Middle East Broadcasting of the two new suspects. "They are still under investigation and we will see what exactly their link was to the bombing of the USS Cole." 
Saleh gave the suspects' names as Mohammed Ahmed al-Ahdal and Ahmed Mohammed Amin, and said they were being interrogated. 
Saleh said the primary suspect in the Cole attack -- Mohammed el-Harazi -- is believed to be in Afghanistan, as well as an alleged accomplice. 
The Afghan connection, he said, has led U.S. investigators to believe the attack is linked to bin Laden. Bin Laden, also accused by the U.S. of masterminding the 1998 bombings of two U.S. embassies in Africa, has denied involvement in the attack on the USS Cole. 
There has been no claim to the Cole attack considered credible by investigators. 
The Arab suspects were detained two days ago when they returned to Yemen from Afghanistan, Saleh said. 
He said the case of six detainees had been sent to a Yemeni prosecutor, but that U.S. officials had asked for the trial to be delayed until the main suspects are arrested. 
The new arrests bring the total number of men to be tried in the Cole case to eight. The trial is expected to take place in Aden, the Yemeni port where the ship was attacked. 
"The U.S. administration has asked us to delay it because they want the entire investigation to be finished before the trial," Saleh said. 
The president added that a team of Yemeni investigators was traveling to Germany where U.S. sailors injured in the blast were treated. The team was expected to go to the United States where investigators would exchange information with the FBI. 
CNN Correspondent Rym Brahimi, The Associated Press and Reuters contributed to this report. 
Note: Pages will open in a new browser window External sites are not endorsed by CNN Interactive.