American Muslims observed Ramadan at mosques across the nation Saturday as U.S. bombs continued to fall on Afghanistan.
Some said they hoped for a quick end to the bloodshed and suffering -- even if it meant battle during the most important holy days.
"I would like to see this over and done with as quickly as possible," said Nazila Adeli, a native of Iran, as she worked behind the counter of her family's bakery in Los Angeles. "Hopefully the war will be over before Ramadan ends."
Others said they would pray for fellow Muslims half a world away.
"As Muslims we consider ourselves one body of people," said Suhail Mulla, 29, before prayers at the Islamic Center of Reseda in Los Angeles. "When Muslims in one part of the world are suffering we also feel their pain."
Mahmoud Abdel-Baset, coordinator of religious and social services at the Islamic Center of Southern California, feared the Taliban would use the continued bombing as a propaganda weapon against the United States.
He believes U.S. officials should step up food drops and other humanitarian efforts in honor of Ramadan.
"The war is not simply military," he said. "It's a war of propaganda on both sides."
Ramadan, a monthlong holiday of fasting and purification, celebrates God's revealing of the Quran, Islam's holy book, to the prophet Mohammed. During Ramadan, Muslims are forbidden to eat, drink, smoke, or have sexual intercourse during daylight hours. But the "iftar," the evening meal that breaks the fast, is a time of celebration and joy.
The holiday began around the world on Friday and Saturday, depending on the sighting of the new moon.
In Dearborn, Mich., hundreds streamed into the American Moslem Society mosque for midday prayers on Saturday. Daifalla Asoufy said Ramadan is a special time to "leave everything to Allah."
"There is nothing we can do, really, about what is going on to the Islam," said Asoufy, president of the Yemini American Association. "Except it's affecting us emotionally."
With the call to prayer being announced, Fawzi Bazzi said he would remember the victims of Sept. 11.
"They should continue to hit them until they get to Osama bin Laden," Bazzi said. "He hurt everybody. I don't think he's a Muslim."
Abdulwahab Mohmed of Detroit said he hopes "they will stop (the bombing) during Ramadan because some innocent people might get killed."
After the sun set Friday over Manhattan, almost two dozen Afghan Muslims gathered in a Queens mosque to break the first fast of Ramadan. The Masjid Hazrat-I-Abubaker Sadiq mosque is spiritual home to about a quarter of New York's estimated 20,000 Afghan immigrants.
The menu was spicy lamb over rice, eggplant in yogurt sauce and green tea. The talk focused on the Taliban's recent defeats, and the growing hopes for a united Afghanistan.
"Here we are all together," said Shershah Ayoub, a project manager for a building maintenance company. "Over here there is no difference between Pashtun, Uzbek, Tajik," ethnic groups in Afghanistan.
Ayoub, a Pashtun, fought with the mujahedeen against the Soviets when he was a teen-ager. He rolled up a gray-striped shirt sleeve to reveal a forearm raked with scars.
"Our country is getting slowly, hopefully back to normal," he said.