   
Two powerful women are the leading contenders in parliamentary elections Monday, and their bitter rivalry is likely to mean that the voting won't put an end to Bangladesh's crippling political violence and strikes.
The two former prime ministers seldom meet and never talk. Each suspects the other's family had a role in the violence that killed relatives who were national leaders -- Hasina's father and Zia's husband.
"There is no doubt one of the two women will become the next prime minister. But I'm not sure if the loser will concede defeat and leave the winner alone," said Abdur Rashid, a convenience store owner.
Rashid, whose business was shut down by 100 days of general strikes called by Zia during Hasina's just-ended term, echoed the frustration of many among the 130 million people of Bangladesh.
Of those, 75 million are eligible to vote for the 300-member Jatiya Sangsad, or parliament. The party or alliance with the most votes will choose the next prime minister.
The campaign has been one of Bangladesh's deadliest -- more than 125 people have been killed since mid-July -- and the prospect of more violence no matter who wins has provoked apathy among some voters.
Since a popular movement restored democracy in 1990, Bangladesh's political scene has been dominated by violence and general strikes.
Hasina launched strikes and quit parliament when Zia was prime minister in 1991-1996. Zia used the same tactics against Hasina, her successor. When Hasina left office July 15, power was transferred to a caretaker administration.
Hasina, 54, is the daughter of the country's slain independence leader and first president, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.
Zia, 56, is the widow of general-turned-president Ziaur Rahman, assassinated in a 1981 military coup. The two men were not related.
The two women dislike each other so much they don't exchange greetings. Their first public appearance together in two years was in August at a dinner the caretaker administration held for former President Carter.
He came to assess the country's election preparations but has decided not to monitor the vote because of security concerns after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on the United States.
Last year, strikes led by Zia's party cost $3.3 billion in lost production and exports -- nearly 60 percent of the annual export income in a country where nearly half the population have difficultly affording food.
The two main parties -- Hasina's Awami League and Zia's Bangladesh Nationalist Party -- have promised to promote democracy, end corruption and reduce poverty. But neither would promise to refrain from strikes or to remain in parliament should it lose the election.
Zia told reporters last week she knew the strikes were harming the economy but said "the bad policies of the past government" forced the strikes.
Hasina, asked if she would accept defeat, replied, "We are ready to sit in the opposition only after we consider the elections free and fair." 
