Although the company admits there are still kinks to be worked out in the current version of Aimster, it's already logged over 4 million users. 
But in the golden era of Britney, Aimster knows that hot technology is only as hot as its spokesmodel, and the early returns show that Aimee is "It." 
Standing outside the Knight's Tale movie premiere in New York City, Aimee gushes, "It's really cool! I love being here! I've always wanted to be a celebrity. Aimster's a way to get my name out there." 
Her name is not the only thing she's putting out. On the front door of the Aimster site , Aimee welcomes users in a slinky black dress slit up to there and a come-hither look that would get other girls her age grounded. 
Elsewhere on the site, she leaves little to the imagination in a white string bikini . 
While many may call her overexposed, like any savvy It Girl, Aimee has managed to maintain an air of mystery, keeping Aimster fans asking, "who is that HOT chick?" 
The short answer is that she's the daughter of Aimster-founder Johnny Deep, who now serves double-duty as Aimee's publicist. 
"She's been pushing her mom and me to let her do this for some time now," he said. "But I kind of insisted that she wait until she turn 16, at which point it'd be her decision," he said. 
It just so happens that Aimee's social promotion coincides with the launch of Aimster E, a new version of the software that allows IM-file swapping within small-enterprise-level networks. 
But the real buzz is over whether Aimee's for real. On the Aimster Girl Fanclub discussion board , some fans speculate that she's a hired model. 
It is hard to believe she's the same, slightly awkward girl-next-door who appeared on the site previously as " Madeleine ," the first name she no longer goes by. She certainly doesn't look 16. 
"Is that a compliment?" Aimee asks in a voice so sweet and earnest it's hard to believe that she's past the age of curfew. "I like being 16, so I always tell people that's how old I am. I just got my driver's permit two weeks ago." 
A high-school sophomore, Aimee is a cheerleader and a member of a club called Future Teachers. She "loves all kinds of music," especially Faith Hill and Britney Spears, and she thinks Julia Roberts is the coolest. 
Have a comment on this article? Send it . 
Printing? Use this version.