Nortel Networks, which has taken a severe beating in the telecom market downturn, reported an expected yet nevertheless astounding loss of $19.4 billion in its second quarter. 
For the other big name on the earnings calendar -- Sun Microsystems -- the picture was a little rosier. The company reported a profit, albeit a much smaller one than a year ago. 
Rounding out the afternoon were computer maker Gateway, which posted a loss; and online auctioneer eBay, which posted a profitable quarter in spite of a slowing economy. 
meets its own forecasts: Microsoft reported earnings that were pretty much the same as it predicted a week ago. 
For the three-month period ending June 30, Microsoft reported a net income of $66 million, or 1 cent a share. The quarterly profit would have been far greater had it not been for the sharp decline in value -- to the tune of $2.6 billion -- of Microsoft's investment portfolio. 
The company reported quarterly revenue of $6.58 billion, up from $5.8 billion in the same period last year. Its operating income was $2.75 billion. 
Microsoft ( MSFT ) said it expects to earn between $6 billion and $6.2 billion in revenue in the current quarter, which ends Sept. 30. It said it expects to report earnings per share of between 39 cents and 40 cents. 
Another huge loss for Nortel: Nortel Networks lived up to an earlier warning, delivering a huge second-quarter loss of $19.4 billion amid declining revenues. It declined to give a new forecast. 
"While I am disappointed with our results for the second quarter, we have taken the right steps in this environment to strengthen Nortel Networks leadership position," said John Roth, Nortel's chief executive, in a statement. 
The telecommunications gear maker said net losses in the second quarter including charges, were $19.4 billion, or $6.08 a share, in line with a June 15 warning. It is one of the largest corporate losses in history. 
Revenues in the quarter dropped to $4.61 billion, down from $7.21 billion in the same period last year, but above analyst estimates of $4.47 billion. 
Net losses from continuing operations for the second quarter were $1.55 billion, or 48 cents per common share, compared to net earnings of $637 million, or 21 per common share on a diluted basis, for the same period in 2000. 
Have a comment on this article? Send it . 
Printing? Use this version.