Friends at a small, private airstrip in this Swiss town say Luigi Fasulo, 67, was in good spirits when he took off Thursday afternoon, and none believe he would have killed himself. Milan's Chief Prosecutor Gerard D'Ambrosio also said suicide was the least likely scenario.
But the pilot's son told an Italian newspaper he may have taken his life because he was distraught over financial troubles.
The crash killed Fasulo and two government lawyers inside the landmark Pirelli building, and sparked fears of another Sept. 11-type attack. Italian officials ruled out terrorism but were searching for other explanations and opened an investigation into the pilot, his health, family situation and finances as a start.
Fasulo's friends in Locarno remembered the 67-year-old as a bon vivant, always joking, always in motion and always with another project in the can. And Thursday was no exception. "He was perfectly normal, jovial as usual," said Pino Scossa, a friend of 40 years who runs the mechanics shop at the airstrip and spoke to Fasulo just before he took off for the short hop to Milan. "Suicide is out of the question."
Like others at the Magadino airport, director Sandro Balestra described Fasulo as an excellent pilot with more 5,000 hours of flight time in over 30 years.
Yet Balestra confirmed stories of mishaps. Fasulo, who at one time ran an air taxi service flying VIPS around Europe, once ran out of fuel as he approached the Zurich airport, missing the runway by more than a mile.
Another time, under similar circumstances, he landed in a potato field.
After the Zurich incident, which occurred over a decade ago, Fasulo temporarily lost his pilot's license and had to take a test to have it reissued, Balestra said. Fasulo gave up the taxi business and no longer had the necessary license to fly with instruments, and on Thursday was flying just by sight.
'Out of' ... Luck?
The mishaps earned Fasulo the nicknames "Cowboy of the Air" and "Out of Oil." But friends claimed those days were long past, and that as he aged, Fasulo had become more cautious.
They said they had never heard him speak of financial difficulties. But there was some evidence to support such claims by his son, wife and other friends in the Italian media.
One of Fasulo's companies Playmatic SA was listed in the 2002 Swiss company directory as being bankrupt.
A sign attached to Fasulo's mailbox in the lobby of the modest apartment building in Lugano where he lived indicated another company, Eurotex Corp. Panama. There was also an address for a third firm, Avioservizi SA of Chiasso, which also was listed in the 2002 directory.
Fasulo's wife, Filomena, told Radio Capital that Italians owed the family money. "These delinquents ruined us," she said, without identifying them. "Instead of paying us, they gave us bills for collection which aren't worth anything."
Officials at the Magadino airport, where Fasulo paid $18,000 a year to park his plane, said he had been trying to sell the 1976 Rockwell Commander 112TC for about a year, asking $70,000.
They claimed, however, the sale wasn't to ease his financial problems but that he intended to buy a newer model.
Fasulo had owned the plane for about 10 years, said mechanic Stefano Scossa. It was last checked at another airport in February and was in good mechanical condition, Scossa said.
"But things break down. Anything could have happened," Scossa said.

Air traffic controllers in Milan said Fasulo reported trouble with the landing gear as he approached the runway, and the tower told him to fly west until the problem was fixed. He veered off course, and a few minutes later, at 5:47 p.m., his twin-engine plane punched into the slim, 30-story Pirelli building, officials said.
D'Ambrosio said prosecutors were working with three hypotheses about the cause: that it was a technical problem, or that Fasulo fell ill or committed suicide. The prosecutor handling the case, Bruna Albertini, noted the suicide theory was based solely on the comments of Fasulo's son, Marco Fasulo, in the Rome daily La Repubblica .
The son a pilot for the airline Swiss was quoted Friday as saying it might have been a suicide induced by despair over financial problems.
"It was a suicide, a suicide, do you understand?" he was quoted as saying. "They wanted to cheat him, knock him down economically, and he killed himself."
Italian Transport Minister Pietro Lunardi, in a briefing today in the Senate, said the pilot could have fallen ill at the controls. After making initial radio contact, "there was silence, he was not operating any of the plane's controls in the last two minutes," he said.
"There's every reason to think there was something strange the kind of target and the way it was hit straight on is spooky," he said.
If mechanical error was to blame, Fasulo may have gotten distracted trying to release the landing gear manually, Scossa said.
Milan police officials headed across the border to Switzerland to coordinate with authorities there, the news agency ANSA said. Swiss prosecutors in Tessin canton launched their own investigation as well.
The impact of the crash, which occurred after most workers had left for the day, gutted the 25th and 26th floors of the tower.