By Elliott Teaford Now it gets tougher for the Clippers, who learned Thursday it might be six weeks before backup point guard Keyon Dooling can play again. Dooling suffered a sprained left ankle during Wednesday's victory over the Chicago Bulls.
The plan, starting tonight against the Toronto Raptors, is to have Earl Boykins play the point in the absence of Dooling as Jeff McInnis' backup. When Lamar Odom regains his eligibility after serving his league-imposed drug suspension, it will give Coach Alvin Gentry more options.
"I don't know if we can go the whole year playing Jeff for 40 minutes a game," Gentry said. "There's a good chance Earl will get more minutes. Every time he's been in there, he's played well for us." Boykins, who stands 5 feet 5, had a key role Wednesday in the Clippers' victory over the Bulls. He had nine points and three assists in eight minutes and made three of four free throws when things got tight. .
"It's one of those situations where it's unfortunate what happened to Keyon," Boykins said. "At the same time, I'm thankful for the opportunity. Hopefully, as my minutes increase, I'll be more comfortable. When you know you're going to be playing 14-15 minutes a game, you feel more comfortable."

For what it's worth, the Clippers have no clue as to when Odom can play again. He was suspended by the league for a minimum of five games Nov. 5 and the team placed him on its suspended list two days later.
Tonight's game will be the Clippers' sixth without Odom, who will be eligible to play Sunday against the New York Knicks at the earliest.
Gentry's gut feeling is that the league will make an announcement about Odom's return early next week. But he had no inside information to offer since all drug-related suspensions are confidential matters between the league and the player. Odom also does not know when he'll be reinstated.


Site--Staples Center.
Radio--KXTA .
Records--Clippers 4-4, Raptors 5-4.
Record vs. Raptors --1-1.
Update--This is the fifth game in a six-game trip for the Raptors. The Raptors have won four of the last five against the Clippers.
Tickets-- 462-2849.