A Canadian cancer researcher may have done a drug company in Brussels, as well as smokers, a huge favor.
Dr. Stephen Lam, director of the lung cancer prevention program at the British Columbia Cancer Research Center in Vancouver, British Columbia, found that one of Solvay 's drugs, marketed as Sialor or Sulfarlem, also significantly reduces the spread of lung-cancer tumors. The drug is now used to treat dry mouth.
Lung cancer kills more people worldwide than any other type of cancer.
The chances of developing lung cancer are reduced every year after a smoker quits. But the risk doesn't go away completely, and 50 percent of lung cancer patients are former smokers.
Lam, who announced his findings at the American Association for Cancer Research annual meeting, hopes this drug might prevent former smokers and maybe even current smokers from developing lung cancer.
"Other clinical trials are warranted immediately," said Frank Rauscher , a professor and chair of the molecular genetics program at the University of Pennsylvania.
The billion-dollar question is, who will pay for more clinical trials? Lam's study was paid for with grants from the National Cancer Institute , and the money has run out. The final stage of clinical trials can cost hundreds of millions of dollars.
But the rewards could be worth it for whoever decides to take on the task. Lung cancer causes more than 150,000 deaths in the United States every year, and 80 percent are due to smoking.
Solvay has not yet decided whether it will sponsor further trials, Lam said.
The drug comes in pill form, which was taken three times a day in the study, and has minimal side effects -- mainly gas and bloating.
Since the drug is already approved in Canada and Europe, oncologists there are free to prescribe Sialor for lung cancer treatment -- a practice known as off-label use. As long as the drug is deemed safe by a regulatory agency, doctors can use it as they see fit.
But in the United States, the drug is not approved -- so if Solvay wants to sell it here, it will have to sponsor a much larger study and then submit the data to the Food and Drug Administration for approval.
Paladin, a Canadian drug company, acquired distribution rights to the drug in 1998. Neither Solvay nor Paladin could be reached for comment.
Lam's study completed the second phase of trials necessary for the FDA's consideration. Over six months, 101 smokers and former smokers took the dry-mouth drug. It reduced the progression of their lung cancer tumors by an average of 22 percent.
To participate in the study, the smokers had to have smoked at least a pack a day for 30 years, or two packs a day for 15 years.
Those who took a placebo had 53 percent more new lesions or lesions that got worse than those who took the drug.
One-third of the participants had quit smoking, and Lam said the treatment worked better for those patients than for the current smokers.
 
Printing? Use this version.