Bill Gramatica made a Cardinal error in judgement on Sunday. 
Gramatica tore the anterior cruciate ligament and cartilage in his non-kicking, right knee celebrating a 42-yard field goal during Arizona's 17-13 loss to the New York Giants. 
The 23 year-old Cardinals placekicker leapt into the air upon splitting the uprights with 7:19 gone in the first quarter, but landed awkwardly. 
Gramatica immediately clutched his knee, but remained in the game. 
He kicked a 23-year field goal with 13:33 left to halftime, but did not return for the second half. 
An MRI revealed a torn ACL and medial meniscus (cartilage). 
Gramatica will require reconstructive surgery that puts his NFL career in doubt. 
Cardinals head coach Dave McGinnis called the rookie's misfortune "most bizarre." 
Drafted in the fourth round out of Florida State, Gramatica converted 16-of-20 field goal attempts and all 25 extra-points in 13 games for Arizona. 
His older brother, Martin, kicks for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
Fire broke out early Tuesday at the world's largest Gothic cathedral, the historic Cathedral of St. John the Divine on Manhattan's Upper West Side. 
Flames shot out from the church, and the roof of an adjoining three-storey gift shop collapsed, but there were no injuries.
Fire officials expect severe smoke and water damage, and fear two rare tapestries held in the church might have been damaged. 
The fire broke out early Tuesday, and about 200 firefighters began to arrive about 7 a.m.
The blaze was under control 2? hours later, and was largely contained in the gift shop. 
Fire officials haven't said what caused the blaze. 
The cornerstone of the Episcopal church was laid in 1892, and construction continued until the Second World War. 
After a 41-year break, construction began again in 1982. 
Building materials in the area are thought to have helped fuel the fire. 
Among the artifacts held in the church are a collection known as the Barberini tapestries, which date to the 17th and 18th centuries.
Woven on the pope's official looms.
They depict the life of Christ. 
Six were on display inside the cathedral, and two are thought to have been badly damaged. 
The investigation has been joined by federal officials trying to determine if the blaze was set intentionally as a terrorist attack. 
But Jere Farrah, a spokesman for the cathedral, said fear won't affect the church, or its activities.
As soon as possible, he said, services would resume. 
"We're not being cavalier, but we are not going to let the terrorism threat stop us from being the kind of church we are chartered to be," he said.
The Cleveland Browns likely believe the officials, and not the Jacksonville Jaguars, cost them a shot at the playoffs in a wild finish that reportedly even involved NFL commissioner Paul Tagliabue. 
Jimmy Smith caught a touchdown pass on the opening drive and Stacey Mack rushed for 115 yards before a controversial call in the final minute eventually secured the Jaguars a 15-10 victory over the Browns. 
Tim Couch appeared to hit rookie Quincy Morgan with a three-yard completion on 4th-on-2 to give the Browns a 1st-and-goal on the Jaguars' 9.
Couch then spiked the ball with 48 seconds left and Cleveland within range of a go-ahead score. 
But referee Terry McAulay initially seemed to suggest the communications system, which allows the replay official to alert him about a reviewable play during the final two minutes of a half, had malfunctioned. 
"The buzzer on my belt went off just prior to the snap," McAulay said.
"We are playing football and I realize the buzzer has gone off and I go to the umpire (Carl Paganelli) and he says his buzzer is going off, too." 
"According to the referee, they had ruled the pass complete, moved the first-down chains and let us run a play," Browns coach Butch Davis said.
"They said (the replay buzzer) went off simultaneously as the snap went through.
We had already run a play.
It makes me sick.
You don't like to lose on questionable calls." 
McAulay said he consulted with replay assistant Bill Reynolds. 
"(I said to) Bill Reynolds, did you press the buzzer prior to the snap?
He said, 'Absolutely, 100-percent,'" McAulay said. "
At that point we had a legal review.
We go in and review the (Couch-to-Morgan) play.
The ball is coming loose, hits the ground, incomplete pass." 
The ruling on the field was reversed, stating Morgan did not have possession. 
"I caught the ball, I know I caught the ball," Morgan said.
"I hit the ground, got up, and spit the ball up on the ground." 
"We did (think it was incomplete) because upstairs they (the coaches) started yelling," Jaguars coach Tom Coughlin said.
"There was a lot of interest upstairs, but it was under two minutes to go and we were out of timeouts.
So, we knew we could not challenge." 
The officials' decision, along with limited communication with the puzzled fans via the public address system, prompted beer bottles and other debris to be hurled on to the field by frustrated members of the crowd of 72,818. 
"We were trying to finish the game.
But as we lined up, a bottle zipped past my head," McAulay said. 
"That was bad, this is not football.
That is not like I know it," Coughlin said.
"They were not throwing water bottles.
They were throwing full beer bottles.
If they hit one of the kids on the field, it could have been serious." 
Due to the danger posed to the players, McAulay initially declared the game over with 48 seconds remaining and the players left the field. 
"He's (Tagliabue) the only one who has the power to determine a game prior to conclusion," said NFL supervisor Dick McKenzie, the league's official observer at Cleveland Browns Stadium on Sunday. 
However, the officials brought the players back onto the field.
Commissioner Tagliabue phoned the officials to inform them the game must be finished. 
"There is no rule that permits us to protest the outcome of the game," Browns president and CEO Carmen Policy said.
"I was on the phone with the commissioner during the lull and we understood the rules from him very clearly and it was his position that the game couldn't be terminated with time left on the clock." 
Policy, however, may have seen the fans' actions in a different light than the league office. 
"If I'm not going to criticize the officials, I am certainly not going to criticize the fans of Cleveland," Policy said.
"I like the fact that our fans cared.
They care about this team and they cared about this game." 
Morgan, who only had two receptions for as many yards as part of a Browns offense that recorded just 220 total net yards, also said he understood the fans' actions. 
"After a call like that, they have to defend their Browns," Morgan said. 
"This is a great football city, but to be honest it disgusts me," said Jaguars receiver Keenan McCardell, who played for the old Browns.
"For some great fans, this was disgusting," McCardell said.
"I never thought I would see it again.
But I saw it again.
It brought back memories of '95." 
In the final home game at Cleveland Municipal Stadium on December 17, 1995, prior to the former franchise's move to Baltimore, McCardell recalled chairs being hurled during a victory over Cincinnati. 
But on this given Sunday, the Browns were not as fortunate on the field.
The Jaguars were awarded possession after the long delay and most of the crowd had departed.
Quarterback Mark Brunell took two knees and time expired. 
"I was getting ready to shower and all of the guys had to get dressed again," Brunell said.
"Apparently, the commissioner called and said that we had to finish the game.
So, we did what the boss said.
" "They just asked for 11 volunteers and we went out there," Browns center Shaun O'Hara said. 
This was the final home game for Cleveland , which closes the season with difficult road contests against Green Bay, Tennessee and Pittsburgh. 
The Jaguars won for the seventh time in eight all-time games against their AFC Central Division rivals. 
Despite scoring on the opening drive and facing a struggling Browns offense, the Jaguars only lead 9-0 at the half.
The Cleveland defense thwarted Jacksonville, recording six of its eight sacks in the opening 30 minutes and holding the dangerous Jaguars' passing attack to just 27 yards in the air. 
Jacksonville was close to scoring late in the third quarter.
But on a 3rd-and-6 at the Cleveland 6, Browns rookie Anthony Henry picked off a pass by Brunell and returned it 97 yards for a touchdown.
It was Henry's second interception of the game and NFL-best ninth of the season. 
"It was just a miscommunication," Brunell said.
"I shouldn't have thrown the ball.
We ran the same route when we scored earlier." 
Mike Hollis kicked three field goals, including a 37-yarder with 2:57 left to give Jacksonville a five-point cushion.
He capped a 14-play, 47-yard drive that killed just over 5:12 late in the contest. 
Hollis, however, did miss an extra point wide left after the Jaguars' game-opening 15-play, 67-yard drive.
Brunell connected with Smith on a four-yard slant pass for the lone offensive touchdown of the game and a 6-0 lead 8:48 into the contest. 
But Brunell, who threw for 202 yards on 20-of-35 passing, said he will remember this game for other reasons.
The United States says it will take swift military action against any country harbouring Osama Bin Laden or other suspected terrorists. 
No specific countries were named in the warning, which was issued during a briefing at the Pentagon.
U.S. Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz said any country considering opening its doors to Osama Bin Laden, or other members of terrorist organizations, would be taking a severe risk. 
"I just think any country in the world that would knowingly harbour bin Laden would be out of their minds.
And I think they've seen what happened to the Taliban, and I think that's a pretty good lesson not to do that," he said. 
In spite of an intensive search there are no signs of bin Laden either inside or outside of Afghanistan.
In the past it has been suggested he may try to seek refuge in countries such as Iraq or Somalia. 
Wolfowitz also raised the possibility that bin Laden may have been killed; buried in one of the caves hit by U.S. bombs. 
"I think it's possible he could be dead in the bottom of one of them," he told the press briefing. 
With the bombing diminishing due to a lack of targets on the ground attention is shifting to Afghanistan's future.
Only four days remain until the new interim government takes charge, but there's still no agreement on a peacekeeping force. 
The United Nations and members of the new government agree foreign troops are needed, but they still haven't worked out the details. 
France, Germany and Britain are expected to play prominent roles in any deployment. 
Canadian troops are also expected to take part, but Prime Minister Jean Chr tien says he hasn't decided how many Canadian troops will be deployed, or when they will be on the ground. 
Other countries aren't waiting for a final agreement.
Britain says it is going ahead with plans to deploy its troops as part of the multinational force. 
The British Ministry of Defence says it's planning on having an advance force of 200 troops on the ground in Kabul by Saturday.
Seeking to protect other U.S. workers from the retirement savings meltdown suffered by Enron Corp.(ENE.E) employees, two senators proposed legislation on Tuesday requiring more diversification in pension plans.
Senators Barbara Boxer and Jon Corzine also called for a thorough investigation of events leading to Enron's collapse, with Boxer declaring she thought someone should "go to jail" for the way Enron employees had been left in the lurch.
Thousands of Enron workers lost their jobs and much of their retirement savings when their retirement plans collapsed along with the former energy giant's stock price.
Boxer and Corzine said 67 percent of the assets in Enron 401(k) retirement plans were invested in Enron stock.
They proposed limiting to 20 percent the investment an employee can have in any one stock in their individual 401(k) accounts.
"No one who gives investment advice would ever recommend someone being invested at 67 percent," Corzine, a New Jersey Democrat, told a news conference together with Boxer, a California Democrat.
"Frankly we have been generous with our bill putting down a 20 percent cap," Corzine said.
The proposal also calls for limiting to 90 days the time an employer can force an employee to hold a matching employer stock contribution in the employee's individual account plan.
It urges a reduction to 50 percent from 100 percent the tax deduction an employer can take on a matching contribution to an individual if that contribution is made in company stock.
With Congress soon to recess for the year, Boxer and Corzine's bill will likely have to wait until next year to progress.
They also acknowledged they have yet to round up Republican support.
Boxer and Corzine spoke after tearful Enron workers told the Senate Commerce Committee how they had been left with nothing after the collapse of the company, which made the largest bankruptcy court filing in U.S. history on Dec. 2.
"When you look at the faces of these hardworking, loyal company employees who have nothing -- they are physically sick over what happened -- you would say the Justice Department ( news - web sites ) should go after these (Enron) people and they should be penalized," Boxer said.
Boxer charged earlier this month that the one-time energy giant Enron had broken existing pension law, a law she authored four years ago, when it prohibited employees from divesting company shares from their retirement plans.
She said she would continue urging the government to enforce that four-year-old law, and planned to write to the Justice Department about it, but added that law was no long enough.
"We're going to see if Enron broke the law.
I personally think they broke many laws.
I hope some of these people wind up in jail ...
And that extends to people who audited the books here," she said.
"But unfortunately that law was watered down ...
I want to do more," she said.
New Afghan leader Hamid Karzai was due to arrive in Kabul Wednesday, vowing to fight terrorism to "its absolute end," as U.S. special forces hunted Osama bin Laden ( news - web sites ) and remnants of his al Qaeda fighters.
Yemen gave a taste of the pressure bin Laden might face outside Afghanistan ( news - web sites ) after storming a hide-out of Islamic militants linked to the Saudi-born exile, the first action of its kind in the Arabian peninsula nation since the September attacks on the United States.
In Kabul, the country's new rulers and the U.S.-led coalition inched toward agreement on deploying foreign peace forces in the capital.
Coalition leaders Britain and the United States want a peace force in place when the new government takes office this weekend.
Karzai said Wednesday he felt the great weight of his task but vowed to end terrorism, warlordism and the rule of the gun in a country he wants to rebuild almost from scratch.
"They have killed us," Karzai said of the ousted Taliban and their foreign allies in bin Laden's al Qaeda network.
receiving the blessing of Afghanistan's exiled former king.
There was "total agreement by all concerned that Afghanistan must have a national army that should be totally under the control of the Ministry of Defense and a national police force under total control of the Ministry of the Interior," he said.
Karzai met in Rome with the 87-year-old exiled former Afghan king Mohammad Zahir Shah, due to return home next year to open a Loya Jirga, or grand council, to map out the country's future as part of a U.N.-sponsored peace plan.
Afghan fighters marched down from peaks around Tora Bora village near the Pakistan border Tuesday, signaling the destruction of al Qaeda forces in an area believed to be bin Laden's last Afghanistan redoubt.
Villagers looking for firewood and salvaging their homes climbed into the rugged hills, honeycombed with caves and tunnels where bin Laden and his fighters were suspected of hiding out.
U.S. special forces returned from the hills empty-handed in the hunt for bin Laden, the millionaire militant accused of masterminding the carnage at the World Trade Center and Pentagon ( news - web sites ).
news - web sites ) agents have arrived in southern Afghanistan to interrogate al Qaeda prisoners and collect intelligence to prevent future attacks by the extremists, agents said Tuesday.
"It's the first time we've been in a foreign country while bombs are falling since looking for Nazis in South America in the 1940s," FBI agent Thomas C. Knowles told reporters at the U.S. Marine base at Kandahar airport.
Eight FBI agents investigating the Sept. 11 suicide airliner attacks on New York and Washington arrived late on Monday to help establish a detention camp for prisoners at the airport near the southern city that was the Taliban power base.
No prisoners have yet arrived, although dozens are scattered across the rugged land.
"We're trying to ascertain if there is any evidence about future terrorist acts against America or American facilities," said Knowles, unit chief for the violent criminal apprehension program based in Quantico, Virginia.
"The second objective is to collect any information available on past attacks against Americans," he said.
These could include not just the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon ( news - web sites ) but also the USS Cole ( news - web sites ) in Yemen last year and the embassies in Africa in 1998, he said.
Captain Thomas Schmidt, the Marine officer in charge of the detention facility, said the Marines have learned a lesson from the prison uprising in Mazar-i-Sharif last month in which hundreds of prisoners and a Central Intelligence Agency ( news - web sites ) agent were killed.
U.S. planes bombed the prison while Northern Alliance troops put down the rebellion by mainly foreign al Qaeda and Taliban prisoners.
The Kandahar detention center is "probably the most secure place in Afghanistan," Schmidt told reporters outside the entrance to the facility surrounded by concertina wire.
"There's overwhelming force opposing any uprising."
Major Ian D. Brasure, a Marine legal adviser, said measures to prevent an uprising included searching prisoners thoroughly, identifying them with tags and segregating troublesome prisoners.
Up to 120 prisoners will be held in a corrugated steel building, a former airport equipment storage area.
Inside, they will be surrounded by several layers of concertina wire and be under 24-hour guard with the lights constantly on.
Outside, there will be armed Marines, a mud brick wall, another layer of wire, outside of which is the airport compound, used now by U.S. military planes.
When they first arrive, they will be blindfolded and bound at the ankles and hands, linked to each other in a human chain, Schmidt said.
They will be given local clothing to wear, printed with identification numbers.
Their personal effects will be cataloged and kept at the facility, he added.
They will be given medical care, shelter, food and clothing and the right to practice their religion, officers said.
Brasure said the International Committee of the Red Cross will have complete access to the prisoners, who will be treated as prisoners of war until determination on their status is made.
Another detention facility was built at Camp Rhino, the desert base south of Kandahar that the Marines first established on November 25 and which will be phased out when Kandahar becomes operational.
Briefly held at Camp Rhino was John Walker, an American who fought with the Taliban and was handed over to the US authorities following the Mazar-i-Sharif uprising.
He was interrogated by an FBI team before he was taken to the USS Peleliu Friday, Knowles said.
Indian army chief General S. Padmanabhan said Wednesday Pakistan was building up troops along the border and India had responded in an "appropriate" manner.
"There is a build-up on the other side.
They have moved in certain forces.
Certain forces which should have gone back have not gone back and beyond that there is very little to say," he told reporters on the sidelines of a business seminar.
Asked whether India was also moving up troops, he said: "I have acted in whatever manner was appropriate for me to act."
"We are a very confident army.
We know our strengths; we know our objectives; we know precisely what we want to do; we are fully capable of looking after all these things," he added.
Tensions have risen between the two nuclear-capable neighbors since an attack on India's parliament on December 13, blamed by New Delhi on Pakistan-based Kashmiri separatist groups.
Daily Variety's front page -- December 17.
Vivendi Universal Monday morning will announce a deal to acquire the principal television assets of Barry Diller's USA Networks with the veteran media mogul to run Universal's film, TV and theme park operations.
Paramount Pictures' " Vanilla Sky ," anything but a plain-vanilla Tom Cruise starrer, flew to No
. 1 in its first box office outing with an estimated $25 million this weekend.
Time Warner-owned producer Castle Rock has nabbed the rights to the Richard Hack book "Hughes:
The Private Diaries, Letters and Memos," a book that will form the basis for a Howard Hughes biopic to star Jim Carrey .will pit Playboy Playmates against pigskin with a special Super Bowl Sunday edition of the network's red-hot reality series "Fear Factor."
" In the Bedroom ," Todd Field's turbulent drama about a married couple dealing with the death of their son, has been chosen as the best film of 2001 by the Los Angeles Film Critics Assn.
David Lynch was named best director for the mysterious suspenser "Mulholland Dr."
Villagers and their donkeys climbed the hills of Tora Bora looking for firewood to sell and homes to salvage as U.S. special forces returned empty-handed from their hunt for Osama bin Laden ( news - web sites ).
Life may be returning to normal in these remote and barren hills, where a few hardy villagers live and which no one had heard of until this month when bin Laden was suspected to be hiding out in caves carved into the hillsides.
Heading down from the rugged canyons in this corner of eastern Afghanistan ( news - web sites ) near the border with Pakistan was a pickup truck filled with U.S. soldiers.
The special forces who have secretly spearheaded much of the ground offensive in Afghanistan since October 7 were tight-lipped as ever about their search for the man the United States has accused of being the mastermind behind the September 11 attacks, which left more than 3,000 people dead.
Also on the road down the hill was a tank crowded with Afghan anti-Taliban mujahideen -- or holy warriors -- also heading away from the front and apparently confident their job was done.
The hundreds of fighters of bin Laden's al Qaeda movement who were said to have been holed up in the mountain redoubts of Tora Bora were either dead, captured or on the run.
And while the military traffic moved downhill, Afghans with donkeys were moving up into the White Mountains which, until recently, were the scene of blistering U.S. bombing raids.
In a once wooded area, now devastated and turned into a moonscape by U.S. bombs, villagers hacked out the stumps of trees felled by the explosives and loaded them on their onto their donkeys for firewood.
Further up, nearer the cave complex that provided a retreat for al Qaeda, and possibly even for bin Laden, the extent of the bomb damage was even greater.
A huge crater lined with timber, bricks and stones, lay just feet away from an al Qaeda tank.
The tank itself appeared not to have been hit directly but partly destroyed by the force of the blast alone, a mute testimony to the awesome destructive power of the U.S. bombardment.
Afghans surrounded some craters, picking through twisted metal and incongruous household debris such as pots and shoes despite warnings of mines and unexploded ordnance in the area.
"Al Qaeda finished," one cried triumphantly in English.
Behind him, the wooded hills rising clearly to snow-capped peaks, were strikingly beautiful in the brilliant December sunshine -- a far cry from the thundering rain of bombs over the last three weeks, which have turned them into a graveyard for a still unknown number of al Qaeda fighters.
Tuesday, the skies were quiet.
Hamid Karzai, the designated head of the interim government that will take power in Afghanistan ( news - web sites ) Saturday, believes an international peace force is likely to arrive in Kabul before his government takes office.
He was asked by reporters on his arrival in Rome late on Monday for talks on Tuesday with the country's former king if he expected peacekeeping troops to arrive in the Afghan capital before Saturday, December 22, the day he is due to take power.
"Probably," Karzai replied.
"I can't give you a date
but I believe they will."
His words echoed a senior U.S. official in Kabul who had said advance troops from an international peace force would arrive in Kabul in time for the government to take office.
The details of the force's make-up have yet to be announced but Prime Minister Tony Blair ( news - web sites ) said in parliament earlier on Monday that Britain would contribute up to 1,500 troops to the peace force and was prepared in principle to lead it.
The force, to guard the peace in the capital city itself and possibly other locations, was a key part of the peace deal signed in Germany this month which paved the way for the new post-Taliban interim administration to take power.
But that agreement left the details out.
Since then, the Northern Alliance, which now controls the capital, has said it wants to see no more than 1,000 foreign troops, and with a tightly defined mandate, mainly to guard government meetings.
But countries expected to contribute troops have discussed a much larger force with a more robust mission.
During a stopover in London on Monday, Karzai, 46, said he felt "very confident."
"So far, things are going very well and let's hope for the best," he told reporters.
Karzai, who is expected to stay in Rome perhaps for two days, is due to meet the former king of Afghanistan Mohammad Zahir Shah early on Tuesday evening.
The 87-year-old ex-king has been living in exile in Rome since 1973 and is seen as a key player in trying to unite Afghans, at least symbolically.
Karzai met the former King's grandson Mostapha Zahir for 20 minutes on his arrival at Rome's international airport.
Karzai, 46, is also expected to hold talks with other members of the king's small group of relatives and advisers, including the former monarch's son Mir Wais Zahir.
The six-month tenure in office of his interim government starts on Saturday.
news - web sites ) is to prepare for battle well beyond its own borders, ready to carry war to those who, as Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld warned Tuesday, may now target Europe after strikes on New York and Washington.
Ministers of the 19-nation bloc met in Brussels and agreed to review defense planning on both sides of the North Atlantic in light of the Sept. 11 attacks on the United States.
Secretary-General George Robertson called on them to face up to the cost of revamping an organization created in the Cold War to fight major land battles in Europe and which has been left largely on the sidelines as Washington has called on individual allies for limited help in its military campaign in Afghanistan ( news - web sites ).
"We agreed to increase the proportion of forces that can be deployed and sustained in operations far beyond Alliance territory," Robertson told a news conference.
"Our security environment must now be seen in a fundamentally different -- and considerably darker -- light."
Until now, the farthest NATO troops have been deployed has been just beyond Alliance frontiers, in the Balkans.
Rumsfeld used the occasion to defend the U.S. decision to abandon the Cold War-era Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty with Moscow in the interests of creating flexible defenses against the sort of unpredictable new threats seen in September.
To underline a common determination not to let differences over the missile treaty cloud better ties with NATO's old adversary, Russian Defense Minister Sergei Ivanov was also in Brussels for talks.
Within hours of arriving in Brussels Monday, Rumsfeld and Ivanov had agreed that bilateral technical talks would begin in January to plan details of joint and deep nuclear arms cuts.
Tuesday, Ivanov promised cooperation against terrorism and won assurances of a much broader, closer relationship with NATO, although with no Russian veto over Alliance decisions.
Rumsfeld also called for sharp cuts in NATO troop numbers in Bosnia in what diplomats said appeared to be an effort to free up American forces for deployment elsewhere.
Warning of "tumultuous decades ahead," Rumsfeld said, "The only way to deal with a terrorist network that is global is to go after it where it is."
"As we look at the devastation they unleashed in the United States, contemplate the destruction they could wreak in New York, or London, or Paris, of Berlin with nuclear, chemical or biological weapons."
College football's 25-game bowl season kicks off Tuesday with the inaugural New Orleans Bowl between North Texas and Colorado State at the Superdome.
The bowl games, which reward the better teams in college football and earn revenues as Holiday season television fare, climax on January 3 when top-ranked Miami meets fourth-ranked Nebraska in the Rose Bowl.
The New Orleans Bowl is one example of how the proliferation of bowl games has diluted the quality of the matches, as North Texas brings a losing record of 5-6 into the contest.
North Texas won the Sun Belt Conference title and the automatic bowl bid by bouncing back after starting the season by losing their first five games.
Colorado State , fell well short of expectations this season, but after a 2-4 start, they rallied to win four of their last five games.
North Texas, known as the Mean Green, will be appearing in the postseason for the first time since the 1959 Sun Bowl.
Marshall will play East Carolina Wednesday in the Mobile Alabama Bowl, while North Carolina State meets Pittsburgh in the Tangerine Bowl in Orlando, Florida.
It's an unlikely premise, but the latest installment of "The Adventures of Barry Diller" has the 59-year-old media mogul, who vowed never, ever to work for anyone again, at the helm of a former French utility company running its all-important Hollywood assets.
But if anyone can turn a bizarre idea into a hit, it's Diller, which is why Jean-Marie Messier, chief of Vivendi Universal announced on Monday he was paying at least $10.3 billion dollars for certain assets of Diller's USA Networks Inc. as well as tapping the legendary Hollywood insider to run the Frenchman's expanding studio empire.
Enlisting Diller and buying much-needed cable, TV and film properties, marks the latest step by Messier, a former banker and civil servant, towards his goal of transforming Vivendi from a staid utility into a media giant to compete with AOL Time Warner Inc., Walt Disney Co. and Viacom Inc.
As Wall Street and Hollywood chewed on the latest plot twist in Tinsel Town, questions abounded regarding the relationship between the headstrong Diller -- who vowed 10 years ago when he left as the head of Fox that he would never work for anyone again -- and flamboyant, pragmatic Messier.
Signs that all may not go smoothly appeared almost immediately when spokesmen from the French group and USA Networks clashed over the true value of the deal.
"I will have no employment contract.
I will be paid no salary," Diller said, signaling his ability to walk away from his new title as chairman and chief executive of the enlarged Vivendi Universal Entertainment unit without jeopardizing his equity 1.4 percent stake worth about $275 million.
Standing with Messier at a press conference in New York on Monday, Diller joked about these questions when he looked down and read aloud the label on one of the podium's audio-visual system controls, which said: "Eject number one."
Laughing, he said, "Better not press that.
That's me."
When asked how he had changed his mind about playing second fiddle to another executive, Diller in all seriousness pointed out he still retains control of the remaining USA Networks Inc. assets not sold to Vivendi, including the Home Shopping Network and Ticketmaster, which were renamed USA Interactive.
"First of all, I have total sovereignty over USA Interactive, so I have my own company," he said.
"And as far as reporting to somebody else in another context, I'm quite happy to do so.
It seems to be an issue of everyone else's, not mine," he said.
While many lay odds the two will butt heads, others believe they complement each other.
Some industry insiders say it was less of a leap than imagined for Beverly Hills-born Diller, who dropped out of college to work as a mailroom clerk in a talent agency before becoming one of Hollywood's biggest players.
"All CEOs are always working for somebody, whether its their board members or investors.
Basically, Diller's shifting his number one constituency to an individual instead of a board or shareholder population, so I don't think its such a cosmic leap," said Stephen Unger, managing partner for Heidrick & Struggles, a recruiting firm with a focus in media.
Diller himself said, "the organization is just right.
It's going to be a tension-free environment," one that will be "lively and creative, and full of the passion of argument.
"
"If you had two consummate industry insiders like Michael Eisner and Michael Ovitz, its a recipe for a clash," Unger said, referring to a fallout between Disney chief Eisner and Ovitz, a Hollywood superagent who formerly worked at Disney.
"I don't see World War III breaking out here.
I see a recognition on the part of Messier for his need to bring in a top entertainment executive," he said.
During his 40 years in entertainment, Diller has helped change the face of television, turned around a studio and has more recently become a strong proponent of interactive TV.
With his proven track record, Diller is expected to lure the U.S. investors that Messier never quite won over.
Described as aggressive, charming, sensitive and overbearing, Diller this year married long-time companion, designer Diane Von Furstenburg, in February.
Known by some as "killer Diller" for his vicious tongue, he left William Morris in 1966 to join ABC where he was instrumental in developing the concept of the TV miniseries and made-for-TV movies.
In 1975, Diller became chairman of Paramount studios but left nearly 10 years later to join Fox, where he helped revive the studio and launch Fox Broadcasting as the fourth network.
The latest deal gives Diller oversight of a Hollywood studio as it enjoys a box office winning streak as well as Universal's international TV and theme park businesses.
Many fear Diller will upset a system that is working well under Universal Studios President Ron Meyer and Universal Pictures Chairman Stacey Snider.
"It's reasonable to expect that Diller will be more proactive.
But Snider and Meyer can learn a lot from him," Unger said.
Network equipment maker 3Com Corp. (
Nasdaq: COMS - news ) beat analysts' estimates for its fiscal second quarter on Tuesday by posting a narrower loss on cost-cutting and rising revenues.
Santa Clara, California-based 3Com posted a loss before charges of $47 million, or 14 cents a share for the quarter ended Nov. 30, compared with a comparable loss of $51.1 million, or 15 cents a share in the year earlier period.
Revenues were $394 million, up from $390 million in the prior quarter but down from $790 million in the second quarter of 2000.
Analysts surveyed by research firm Thomson Financial/First Call had on average expected 3Com to post a net loss of 22 cents a share, with estimates ranging between a loss of 17 cents to a loss of 28 cents.
With charges included, 3Com said its net loss was $104 million, or 30 cents a share, compared with a net loss of $142 million, or 41 cents, a year ago.
"Our second quarter results confirm we are on or ahead of plan in virtually every part of our turnaround," 3Com Chief Executive Bruce Claflin said.
3Com aimed to end November with 6,000 employees, roughly half its work force from a year ago, following a dramatic restructuring it implemented to offset sagging revenues.
3Com shares, which trade on Nasdaq, closed on Tuesday at $5.31, up 27 cents, or 5.4 percent.
The shares were 58 percent higher than their year-low of $3.37 on Sept. 17.
By contrast, the Nasdaq Composite index ( IXIC - news ) closed at 2,004.76 on Tuesday, up 45 percent from its year-low of 1,387.06 on Sept. 21.
Indian Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee ( news - web sites ) said Wednesday India was using diplomacy as its first weapon to put pressure on Pakistan over the suicide raid on parliament, but added other options were still open.
In his first statement to parliament since the December 13 suicide attack that killed 14 people, including the five assailants, Vajpayee also said he would build a consensus before any retaliation.
"We have shown a lot of restraint.
We are trying to use diplomacy as a weapon but other options are open and we will consider them carefully before taking any decision," he said in a firm speech that lasted almost 35 minutes, marked by occasional restrained applause.
Vajpayee's coalition government, which has blamed the parliamentary attack on Pakistan-based Kashmiri separatists backed by Pakistan, is under pressure from his own party to launch a military strike against the militants despite international appeals for restraint.
news - web sites )
Secretary-General George Robertson called on allied defense ministers Tuesday to shelve Cold War reflexes and be prepared to spend money to gird for the new war on global terrorism.
"What was previously an abstract possibility became on September 11 an appalling reality and...our security environment must now be seen in a fundamentally different and considerably darker light," he said at the start of a two-day meeting.
"We've only just begun what must be a further adaptation of the alliance to meet the new security challenges that we face."
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, fresh from a visit to the war front in Afghanistan ( news - web sites ), was expected to brief allies on the campaign against the Taliban and the al Qaeda network, blamed for the September 11 attacks on the United States.
However, talks on a post-war peacekeeping force were likely to be confined to the corridors of NATO's Brussels headquarters.
Britain has said it is willing to lead the force of 3,000 to 5,000 troops, of which at least the lead elements are expected to be in place in Kabul by Saturday.
evoked a mutual defense clause in its founding treaty after the suicide hijack attacks on New York and Washington.
But apart from sending early warning planes to patrol American skies and putting on a show of naval power in the eastern Mediterranean, the 19-nation bloc has been kept out of the action, with Washington calling on individual allies -- chiefly Britain -- for limited help in its Afghanistan campaign.
Robertson, who has insisted in recent weeks on NATO's continued relevance, urged defense ministers to adapt a machine created during the Cold War to fight major land battles in Europe to take on the nebulous target of terrorism.
"We must adapt our concepts, our relationships and especially our defense capabilities..." he said.
"And we must draw the necessary conclusions even if that means additional resources for defense and security and new balances inside our defense programs."
Officials say defense forces need better intelligence, more intelligence-sharing and more robust capabilities to counter proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Rumsfeld, in a speech prepared for delivery later in the day, also called for "critical investment" on security.
"One of the illusions shattered on September 11 was the idea that, with the end of the Cold War, the world's democracies could afford large cuts in defense spending," he said.
The ministers were due to hold talks with Russian Defense Minister Sergei Ivanov, whose country has swung closer to the Western allies in the past three months despite Washington abandoning the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty (ABM).
Within hours of arriving in Brussels Monday, Rumsfeld and Ivanov had agreed that technical talks would begin in January to plan details of joint and deep nuclear arms cuts.
Russia remains strongly opposed to a U.S. plan to build a national missile defense, which is prohibited by their ABM treaty, but Rumsfeld said Moscow's muted response to the U.S. move underlined the new amity between the old foes.
"I believe this shows that the U.S.-Russian relationship has matured to the point that we can agree to disagree agreeably on the ABM Treaty, without allowing those differences to affect progress in other areas of our relationship," he said.
The other allies are also expected to rally behind Russia, whose cooperation with the U.S. military campaign in Afghanistan prompted NATO foreign ministers earlier this month to promise Moscow a place with its former foes in a special council of 20.
The ministers will also discuss a revamp of peacekeeping operations in the Balkans -- where NATO is leading about 60,000 soldiers -- with a view to treating the area as a single region and not three separate theaters.
"I think it's no secret that a number of allies would wish to see numbers reduced when the possibility arises for them to be," a NATO official said.
"This is something the military authorities will address in the context of rationalization and regionalization."
Sterling Hitchcock made enough of an impression on the New York Yankees to earn a two-year contract.
Financial terms were not disclosed, but the left-handed pitcher reportedly received $12 million in a deal that was officially announced by the team on Tuesday.
Hitchcock, 30, will be slotted as the fourth or fifth starter in a high-priced rotation headed by Roger Clemens , Mike Mussina , Andy Pettitte and Orlando Hernandez .
"Sterling is left-handed, tough and very effective," said Yankees general manager Brian Cashman.
"He is a proven playoff pitcher who will complement our rotation as we set to defend our American League title."
The Yankees may also be interested in bringing back free agent lefthander David Wells , but that would put Hernandez's spot in the rotation in peril since he is up for arbitration.
New York re-acquired Hitchcock from the San Diego Padres for outfielder Darren
Blakely and pitcher Brett Jodie last July, a little more than a year after he underwent "Tommy John" ligament transplant surgery on his pitching elbow.
Hitchcock went 4-4 with a 6.49 ERA in 10 appearances, including nine starts, with the Yanks.
But he lived up to his reputation as a solid postseason performer, allowing two earned runs over seven innings in three playoff appearances and earning the win in Game Five of the World Series.
Originally selected by the Yankees in the ninth round of the 1989 draft, Hitchcock has also pitched for the Seattle Mariners and Padres and has a career record of 67-67 with a 4.75 ERA in 222 games, including 187 starts.
He has a 4-0 record with a 1.76 ERA in nine postseason games and was the Most Valuable Player of the 1998 National League Championship Series.
The man designated to head the interim government that will take power in Afghanistan ( news - web sites ) this week was to meet the former Afghan king Tuesday for talks to smooth the way for the exiled monarch's return.
Hamid Karzai arrived in Rome late Monday night for a meeting with the 87-year-old former king, Mohammad Zahir Shah, who has lived in exile in the Italian capital since 1973.
Zahir Shah is due to return home in six months to open a Loya Jirga, or grand council, to map out the country's future as part of a U.N.-sponsored peace plan.
Karzai told reporters on his arrival in the Italian capital that he believed an international peace force was likely to arrive in Kabul before his government takes office Saturday.
"I can't give you a date
but I believe they will," Karzai said.
His words echoed a senior U.S. official in Kabul who had said advance troops from an international peace force would arrive in Kabul in time for the government to take office.
Karzai was expected to stay in Rome for two days.
He met the former king's grandson, Mostapha Zahir, for 20 minutes on his arrival at Rome's international airport.
Karzai was also expected to hold talks with other members of the king's small group of relatives and advisers, including the former monarch's son, Mir Wais Zahir.
The ex-king is seen as a key player in trying to unite Afghans, at least symbolically.
Karzai, 46, leader of the Pashtun Popalzai tribe, was named on December 5 to head the interim administration that will rule Afghanistan for six months and prepare the way for a transitional government that will take power for the following two years.
He was nominated for the interim post by the so-called Rome group of exiled former king and benefited from being a member of the dominant ethnic Pashtun group who many felt were not fully represented at the Bonn conference that brought together representatives of most of Afghanistan's anti-Taliban political players.
During a stopover in London Monday, Karzai said he felt "very confident."
"So far, things are going very well and let's hope for the best," he told reporters.
The details of the proposed multi-national peace force's make-up have yet to be announced but British Prime Minister Tony Blair ( news - web sites ) said in parliament Monday that Britain would contribute up to 1,500 troops to the peace force and was prepared in principle to lead it.
The force, to guard the peace in the capital city Kabul and possibly other locations, was a key part of the peace deal signed in Germany which paved the way for the new post-Taliban interim administration to take power.
Since then, the Northern Alliance, which now controls the capital, has said it wants to see no more than 1,000 foreign troops with a tightly defined mandate, mainly to guard government meetings.
But countries expected to contribute troops have discussed a much larger force with a more robust mission.
Network equipment maker 3Com Corp. (
Nasdaq: COMS - news ), fighting to recover after the telecom sector downturn this year, posted a narrower-than-expected second-quarter loss on Tuesday and said it hopes to return to profitability by the fourth quarter.
Santa Clara, California-based 3Com posted a loss before charges of $47 million, or 14 cents a share in the quarter ended Nov. 30, compared with a loss of $51.1 million, or 15 cents a share in the year-earlier period.
Company officials attributed the better-than-expected results to cost-cutting efforts and rising revenues.
Analysts surveyed by research firm Thomson Financial/First Call had on average expected 3Com to post a loss of 22 cents, with loss estimates ranging from 17 cents to 28 cents.
The narrowing loss was a sign that 3Com is positioned to work toward profitability, executives said, while citing concerns about the slow economy and the depressed telecom market.
"Each one of our businesses had growth," 3Com Chief Executive Bruce Claflin told Reuters.
"Our enterprise business grew 1 percent.
Our PC card business grew 6 percent.
And CommWorks, which targets carriers and service providers, grew 8 percent.
"
The gains helped lift 3Com's revenue to $394 million from $390 in the prior quarter, the first sequential revenue gain for 3Com since it announced restructuring plans in January.
Claflin also credited $200 million in cost cuts for helping second-quarter results, but said the company has more room to pare expenses, including more jobs.
3Com, which launched a major restructuring to offset sagging revenues during the telecom downturn, aimed to end November with 6,000 employees, roughly half its work force of a year earlier.
3Com Chief Financial Officer Michael Rescoe told a conference call the company hoped to return to profitability in its fiscal fourth quarter, which ends May 31, 2002.
The company, a pioneer of the Ethernet networking standard, last saw profitability in the third quarter of fiscal 2000 which ended in February that year.
Analyst Michael Cristinziano of Gerard Klauer Mattison & Co. said 3Com may be too optimistic about its turnaround.
"Management is doing a good job managing new business, but it doesn't seem to be enough" to compensate for the continued downturn in spending on information technology, Cristinziano said.
3Com shares, which trade on the Nasdaq, closed on Tuesday at $5.31, up 27 cents, or 5.4 percent.
The shares were 58 percent higher than their year-low of $3.37 on Sept. 17.
By contrast, the Nasdaq Composite index ( IXIC - news ) closed at 2,004.76, up 45 percent from its year-low of 1,387.06 on Sept. 21.
Afghanistan ( news - web sites ) (Reuters) -
Taliban diehards attacked a southern Afghan town near their former stronghold of Kandahar, illustrating the dangers facing a new administration due to take over in Kabul Saturday.
A British-led multinational security force was expected to start arriving at any moment -- but with a low-key role and in limited numbers.
The new Afghan leader, Hamid Karzai, headed back to the capital Wednesday from talks in Rome with ex-King Zahir Shah.
With Osama bin Laden ( news - web sites ) still on the run, eight FBI ( news - web sites ) agents set about interrogating captured members of his al Qaeda network at a newly built detention center at Kandahar airport.
In the same region, remnants of Afghanistan's routed Taliban, bin Laden's protectors, attacked tribal fighters overnight at a town between Kandahar and Pakistan, reporters said.
A team of French journalists leaving Kandahar for Pakistan said they had been stopped by excited guards at a checkpoint before the town of Takhteh Pol.
"The guards said there was fighting all night because the Taliban attacked.
They said to come back in a few hours because they had to check who was in control of the town," one of the reporters told Reuters.
U.S. planes had dropped food packets in the area, and that added to the confusion as residents scrambled to pick them up.
Driving back to Kandahar, the reporter said he saw two or three cars full of anti-Taliban commanders heading for Takhteh Pol and one car of plainclothes U.S. forces.
Twelve days after the Taliban surrendered Kandahar, birthplace of the hard-line Islamist movement, the city appears to be under the control of the new city governor, Gul Agha.
But U.S. and ethnic tribal Pashtun forces are still searching for scattered pockets of hardcore Taliban and fighters loyal to bin Laden, the man Washington accuses of masterminding the September 11 suicide attacks on the United States.
Gul Agha said Tuesday he was preparing to launch an operation against Taliban forces who had not surrendered.
"We will start an operation soon in the surrounding towns and districts and try our best to disarm the Taliban who are still there and take their vehicles, then we will move into the mountains," said Gul Agha.
A British-led multinational security force should start deploying in the Afghan capital by the weekend, diplomatic and military sources said Wednesday.
In a statement released today, an attorney hired by Walker's parents said the 20-year-old deserves the same Constitutional rights as any American citizen and complained that, outside a dictated letter, Walker's parents have not been allowed to have access to their son.
"We still do not know what the facts are," attorney James Brosnahan said in the statement.
"All we've heard is speculation and rumor.
No one from the outside, other than the Red Cross, has seen John.
Whatever the accusations, John has Constitutional rights.
Getting the facts, allowing an accused person to talk with his attorney, ensuring that our system operates fairly regardless of the allegation that is what the Constitution was designed to protect."
"John has the right to counsel," Brosnahan added.
"He has now been in custody and reportedly subject to ongoing interrogations by various government agents for 16 days without any access to an attorney and without the ability to communicate with his family." 
Walker is recuperating from a gunshot wound and cooperating with authorities on a ship in the Arabian Sea after U.S. officials decided to move him from a Marine base in southern Afghanistan last week.
Authorities say he is giving them information, and they are particularly interested in what he may know about the failed prison revolt at Mazar-e-Sharif where CIA operative Johnny Micheal Spann was killed. 
While Walker has cooperated, U.S. officials have mulled his fate, trying to figure out what charges, if any, he may face.
Congressional leaders have suggested he could be charged with treason, but White House officials say his case is not that simple.
"I don't think this is a typical case," said White House spokesman Ari Fleischer in his daily press briefing today.
"This is a case where an American citizen was found in a country abroad in which he was doing battle with the United States." 
U.S. officials have also hesitated in labeling Walker, refusing to call him a prisoner of war and preferring "battlefield detainee."
However, the Pentagon says that Walker is receiving food, water, and medical attention and being treated like a prisoner of war.
"He's being treated consistent with the Geneva protections for prisoners of war," said Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz.
"So he enjoys all the protections that would go with 'prisoner of war' status."
U.S. government officials have indicated Walker may be coming back to the United States soon.
Still, Walker's parents, Frank Lindh and Marilyn Walker, complain that they have repeatedly asked to government to help them gain access to their son. 
Brosnahan said the only correspondence they have had with Walker is a letter he dictated to a Red Cross worker they received last week.
They say they have since replied with a letter of their own and do not know whether it has been delivered to him. 
Reported by ABCNEWS' Pierre Thomas.
Intelligence sources told ABCNEWS they believe that they now have in custody some of Osama bin Laden's most senior people. 
Although officials, lacking photographs and fingerprints, were having some problems identifying these individuals among the bedraggled masses, sources said other prisoners are starting to finger their former leaders and provide information on where bin Laden might be. 
At the same time, administration officials appeared to be warning that the war on terrorism had a long way to go and that it might go far from Afghanistan.
Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz on Tuesday warned countries against harboring bin Laden as he admitted al Qaeda cells were still operating in several countries. 
"I just think any country in the world that would knowingly harbor bin Laden would be out of their minds," Wolfowitz told reporters.
"I think they've seen what happened to the Taliban
and I think that's probably a pretty good lesson for people not to do that."
Intelligence sources told ABCNEWS their best guess is that bin Laden is still in Afghanistan, but is most likely in high mountain passes, trying to walk out of the country to Pakistan.
Military sources said bad weather has obscured American surveillance efforts along the border, but teams of U.S. special operations troops are in some of those high passes, waiting for the opportunity to strike. 
agents are now in southern Afghanistan to help interrogate al Qaeda members who have been taken prisoner.
Eight agents investigating the Sept. 11 terror attacks on the United States arrived there late Monday.
"It's the first time we've been in a foreign country while bombs are falling since looking for Nazis in South America in the 1940s," FBI agent Thomas C. Knowles told reporters at the U.S. Marine base at the Kandahar airport.
In the Tora Bora mountain region, another 50 al Qaeda prisoners were pulled from some of the most remote caves Tuesday, unaware their brethren had abandoned them and were fleeing.
Many of them may be moved to the new detention compound at the Khandahar airport, which received its first 15 battlefield detainees Tuesday. 
Two U.S. soldiers have been badly injured.
One stepped on a land mine at the Bagram airport Tuesday, and had his foot was amputated.
He was the fourth U.S. soldier to be in hurt in a land mine accident in Afghanistan, one of the most heavily mined countries in the world.
Another was bitten by a cobra while pulling guard duty at an airfield in Pakistan.
His heart stopped briefly.
Both are headed for an American Army hospital in Germany.
The count of dead and missing at the World Trade Center stands at 3,018.
New York City officials say 515 people are missing.
The medical examiners office has issued 502 death certificates, and 2,001 death certificates have been issued without a body at the request of victims' families. '
Martha Raddatz and John McWethy in Washington contributed to this report.
Intelligence sources tell ABCNEWS they believe that they now have in custody some of Osama bin Laden's most senior people. 
Although officials, lacking photographs and fingerprints, were having some problems identifying these individuals among the bedraggled masses, sources say other prisoners are starting to finger their former leaders and provide information on where bin Laden might be. 
At the same time, administration officials appeared to be warning that the war on terrorism had a long way to go and that it might go far from Afghanistan.
Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz today warned countries against harboring bin Laden as he admitted al Qaeda cells were still operating in several countries. 
"I just think any country in the world that would knowingly harbor bin Laden would be out of their minds," Wolfowitz told reporters at a press briefing at the Pentagon today.
"I think they've seen what happened to the Taliban
and I think that's probably a pretty good lesson for people not to do that." 
In Yemen, there was a fierce military battle involving tanks and artillery after government troops went into a village believed to be sheltering al Qaeda supporters. 
In Somalia, the CIA has been undertaking reconnaissance missions for the past three weeks. 
And in Sudan and the Philippines, U.S. advisers are expected to arrive to consider other actions against alleged terrorists. 
Intelligence sources told ABCNEWS their best guess is that bin Laden is still in Afghanistan, but is most likely in high mountain passes, trying to walk out of the country to Pakistan.
Military sources say bad weather has obscured American surveillance efforts along the border, but teams of U.S. special operations troops are in some of those high passes, waiting for the opportunity to strike.
Not a single bomb was dropped today as the airstrikes were suspended after a week of heavy attacks, to allow for searches by U.S., British and anti-Taliban fighters.
"I think it's possible [bin Laden] could be dead in the bottom of one of [the caves at Tora Bora]," Wolfowitz said.
However, AC-130 gunships the equivalent of flying tanks continued to patrol the skies, and track down al Qaeda fighters fleeing towards the Pakistani border.
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld told a NATO meeting in Brussels, Belgium, that the search would be "tough, dirty, hard work," and perhaps the most dangerous phase yet in the current operation.
Another 50 al Qaeda prisoners were pulled from some of the most remote caves today, unaware their brethren had abandoned them and were fleeing.
Many of them may be moved to the new detention compound at Khandahar airport built by the Marines, which received its first 15 battlefield detainees today.
Two of them were driven to the entrance of the detention center, in a military Humvee, apparently because they were injured, or had trouble walking.
The rest were led in about 20 minutes later, shuffling in a line, their hands and feet bound.
Apparently they were tied together as a group.
The 15 were being held by the provisional government at the Shedirgham prison near Mazar-e-Sharif, and will be interrogated by eight FBI agents who arrived today.
The Marines say the men will be safeguarded and provided with medical care, food, shelter and water; they'll be allowed to practice their religion; and to meet with the Red Cross.
Following a prison uprising in Mazar-e-Sharif last month when hundreds of Taliban and al Qaeda detainees and a CIA agent were killed, Maj.
Ian D. Brasure, a Marine legal adviser at the Kandahar detention center, said special security measures would be taken.
They include searching the prisoners thoroughly, identifying them with tags and segregating troublemakers.
The United States has custody of 20 Taliban or al Qaeda prisoners.
Five of them, including U.S. citizen John Walker and Australian David Hicks, were being held on board the USS Peleliu in the Arabian Sea. 
Wolfowitz today said the Pentagon believed the three Taliban or al Qaeda prisoners on board the Peleliu were "fairly important" in the al Qaeda and Taliban chain of command, but he refused to provide details. 
Meanwhile, the search for the former Taliban leader Mullah Mohammed Omar has been stepped up.
Anti-Taliban commanders believe the reclusive Omar is about 100 miles northwest of Kandahar, which he is believed to have fled when anti-Taliban forces took over the southern Afghan city earlier this month.
Anti-Taliban Pashtun fighters who now control Kandahar told reporters Omar would be hanged if he was caught. 
Kandahar's newly appointed governor, Gul Agha, today told the BBC he would turn over other Taliban leaders captured in and around the city. 
But the Pakistan-based Afghan Islamic Press quoted a militia spokesman in the Tora Bora region as saying al Qaeda captives would be handed over to the newly appointed Afghan interim administration headed by Hamid Karzai and not to any foreign country. 
Two U.S. soldiers have been badly injured.
One stepped on a land mine at the Bagram airport today, and had his foot was amputated.
He was the fourth U.S. soldier to be in hurt in a land mine accident in Afghanistan, one of the most heavily mined countries in the world.
Another was bitten by a cobra while pulling guard duty at an airfield in Pakistan.
His heart stopped briefly.
Both are headed for an American Army hospital in Germany.
Hamid Karzai, Afghanistan's newly appointed interim leader, met with the exiled former king of Afghanistan, Zahir Shah, in Rome today.
Karzai received the ex-king's blessing and his personal Koran, and later told reporters that he he would be happy with a foreign peacekeeping force of any size necessary to be beneficial to his country.
The U.S. flag flown over ground zero in New York City was raised over Kandahar airport today by U.S. Marines.
The flag had been sent by the New York City police department.
In southern Afghanistan, two C-130 transport planes launched evasive action after seeing flashes on the ground they thought were from Stinger missiles.
However, the Pentagon believed the flashes were the result of a celebration on the ground to mark the end of the Muslim holy month of Ramadan.
New leaflets being dropped in Afghanistan offer gruesome depictions of Osama bin Laden and other al Qaeda leaders. 
The count of dead and missing at the World Trade Center stands at 3,018.
New York City officials say 515 people are missing.
The medical examiners office has issued 502 death certificates, and 2,001 death certificates have been issued without a body at the request of victims' families. '
Martha Raddatz and John McWethy in Washington contributed to this report.
Enraged Cleveland Browns fans pelted the field with thousands of plastic beer bottles when officials overturned a last-minute call Sunday, striking the players and forcing them to run for cover. 
The game was stopped for about a half-hour with 48 seconds to play because of the violence, sparked by an instant-replay call that helped the Jacksonville Jaguars win 15-10. 
Most of the bottles were plastic, but many were filled with beer.
The Jaguars and Browns had to dodge flying objects as they sprinted to their locker rooms.
Officials were doused with beer and cups of ice. 
"We feared for our lives," Jaguars wide receiver Jimmy Smith said.
"We were just trying to dodge as many beer bottles as we could.
It was like dodging bullets." 
The Browns also were under attack. 
"I was definitely looking over my shoulder for bottles flying," quarterback Tim Couch said. 
Nobody was seriously hurt.
Some fans tried to run onto the field but they were stopped by security.
Police made arrests but exact numbers were not immediately released. 
"I've never seen a game, heard of a game anything like this," Browns coach Butch Davis said.
"I know the fans were upset, but our guys were getting hit along with the Jaguars and the officials.
" 
The fans' ugly behavior came after the Browns had a first down at Jacksonville's 9-yard line taken away despite running a play before the officials reviewed the previous play. 
Couch had apparently completed a fourth-and-2 pass to wide receiver Quincy time-out with 1:08 remaining, and the Browns, who were out of time-outs, quickly rushed to the line of scrimmage. 
On first down, Couch spiked the ball with 48 seconds to go, and was headed to the sideline when the officials began to discuss Morgan's catch.
After several confusing minutes, referee Terry McAulay announced that the officials were reviewing the play.
When McAulay finally emerged from the TV review monitor, he announced that Morgan did not catch the ball. 
Morgan was sure he caught the pass. 
"I hit the ground, got up and spit the ball on the ground," the rookie said. 
As Cleveland's bench erupted in protest, Browns fans in the "Dawg Pound" bleacher section closest to the play began hurling bottles and other objects from the stands. 
Nearly 30 minutes after ordering players off the field, officials resumed play.
Jacksonville's offense returned intact while the Browns sent three offensive players out with their defense since some players had already undressed. 
About 5,000 fans were still in the stadium to see Brunell take two snaps and run out the clock.
In a triumph for President Bush, Congress cleared landmark education legislation Tuesday requiring annual math and reading tests for millions of students as part of an ambitious effort to boost classroom performance. 
The 87-10 Senate vote came less than a week after the House bestowed its blessing on the measure, 381-41.
Mr. Bush, who placed education atop his first-year list of legislative priorities, is expected to sign the bill into law within days. 
"This legislation before us today is a blueprint for progress in all of the nation's schools," said Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass.
, one of four key lawmakers who shaped the measure.
"It proclaims that every child matters every child in every school in every community in America." 
Sen. Judd Gregg, R-N.H., added, "What we're doing is creating opportunities for local school districts, states and especially parents, to take advantage of using their federal dollars in a more effective way of educating the low-income child." 
The bill mandates annual state reading and math tests for all students in grades three through eight.
Poor-performing schools would have to give some of their federal aid to kids for tutoring or transportation to another public school. 
In addition to requiring millions of students to be tested each year, the measure would also would focus new resources on schools that consistently fail. 
In a statement, Mr. Bush thanked Congress, saying: "These historic reforms will improve our public schools by creating an environment in which every child can learn through real accountability, unprecedented flexibility for states and school districts, greater local control, more options for parents and more funding for what works." 
A few lawmakers, including Sen. James Jeffords, I-Vt., have complained that the $26.5 billion plan falls short, especially for costly programs to help disabled students.
Jeffords, who headed the Senate's education committee until he left the Republican Party last May, said the shortcomings make the bill embarrassing. 
"I believe it is better to approve no bill rather than to approve a bad bill," Jeffords said.
"I am sincerely hoping, for the sake of our children, that history will prove me wrong." 
The bill is also opposed by school board and superintendents' groups, who say state and local education budgets will be strained by its demands. 
The House and Senate spent months refining the massive Elementary and Secondary Education Act, which provides most of the funding and overall regulation for K-12 education. 
Schools would be required to come up with plans to close the achievement gap between low-income and middle-class students as well as white and minority students. 
Click here for a closer look at the Bush presidency.
Click here for a look at the 107th U.S. Congress.
States and school districts would get more freedom over how they spend federal dollars.
Money intended for teacher improvement, for example, could instead pay for salary increases or additional instructors. 
Districts would have to submit annual "report cards" showing a school's standardized test scores compared with others schools, both locally and statewide. 
Schools would have to test students with limited English skills in English after students had spent three consecutive years in a U.S. school.
Schools also would also get a share of Mr. Bush's signature reading program, which provides nearly $1 billion per year for the next five years, in hopes that every student can read by third grade. 
Overall, the bill authorizes $26.5 billion for elementary and secondary education in the 2002 budget year, which began Oct. 1.
That would be about $8 billion more than the year before, and about $4 billion more than Mr. Bush requested, but nearly $6 billion less than Senate Democrats wanted.
The actual amount could be lowered once Congress makes its annual spending decisions.
India accused Pakistan on Tuesday of trying to wipe out its political leadership in last week's suicide attack on Parliament because Islamabad could not accept a powerful and secular neighbor. 
But in a speech to Parliament, Home (Interior)
Minister Lal Krishna Advani stopped well short of announcing retaliation against Pakistan, as the Bush administration called for caution as India considers how to respond to the attack on its Parliament building. 
Soon after Indian Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee told party members to prepare for a decisive battle against terrorism, Advani said Pakistan was waging a systemic campaign of "terrorism" against India. 
"This time, the terrorists and their mentors across the border had the temerity to try to wipe out the entire political leadership of India," Advani said, vowing to crush terrorism. 
Pakistan rejected allegations that it sponsored the attack in which the five attackers and nine others died and asked New Delhi to go to the U.N. Security Council to seek an independent inquiry. 
"If India has courage of its convictions, if it believes that its allegations are right, then India should take the matter to the Security Council," Foreign Minister Abdul Sattar told state-run Pakistan Television.
India's "prejudiced and biased allegations" are aimed to "defame the freedom struggle in Kashmir as a terrorist movement." 
Advani questioned the timing of the raid amid the U.S.-led worldwide war against terrorism. 
"The only answer...is that Pakistan...itself a theocratic state with an extremely tenuous tradition of democracy -- is unable to reconcile itself with the reality of a secular, democratic, self-confident and steadily progressing India, whose standing in the international community is getting inexorably higher with the passage of time," he said. 
Amid fears of war, junior Foreign Minister Omar Abdullah later told Parliament military force was the last option. 
"Force, violence, war will never be the first option," he said. 
Tensions between the nuclear rivals, who have fought three wars since 1947, have increased as India considers a military strike against Kashmiri separatists sheltering in Pakistan and blames its arch foe for the attack on Parliament. 
The White House is working feverishly to prevent an eruption between two key allies in the war on terrorism, reports CBS News Chief White House Correspondent John Roberts . 
"This is not a reason for India or Pakistan to take action against each other.
This is a time for India and Pakistan to take action against the terrorists," said White House press secretary Ari Fleischer, reacting to last week's suicide attack. 
Bush has pledged to eliminate terrorism across the globe and hold terrorist-harboring nations accountable.
The administration has condemned the attack in India, but Bush's position is complicated by his alliance with Pakistan in the U.S.-led war in neighboring Afghanistan. 
"India has a legitimate right to self-defense," Fleischer said.
"The president believes if that is carried out by India, it needs to be done in a manner that is reflective of the complications in the region and does not add to those complications." 
India accuses Pakistan of sponsoring the separatists.
Pakistan denies this, but says it offers moral support. 
Islamabad has threatened to respond if attacked. 
India's main opposition Congress also urged restraint. 
"The remedy should not be worse than the malady," said Shivraj Patil, Congress deputy leader in the lower house. 
"War should be the last option, after all other options are exhausted.
We don't need rhetoric but balance.
We have not yet exhausted our diplomatic weapons.
" 
Stocks, bonds and the rupee firmed after Advani's statement, which reduced markets' fears of a stronger and swifter response. 
A spokesman for Vajpayee's fiercely nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), which heads the ruling coalition, said the prime minister told party members to prepare their constituencies for a tough battle against terrorism. 
India has already called on Islamabad to close down the Lashkar-e-Taiba and Jaish-e-Mohammed -- two of several Pakistan-based groups fighting Indian rule in the Himalayan region of Kashmir -- which it says are linked to Pakistan's main intelligence agency, Inter-Services Intelligence. 
Police say the parliamentary assailants were all Pakistani. 
They have also arrested four Indians, including a man they say killed a passenger in the 1999 hijacking of an Indian Airlines jet that ended when India freed pro-Pakistan militants. 
After holding back in the face of previous violence, Vajpayee is coming under mounting pressure from hard-liners within the BJP and elsewhere to take military action against the separatists, using airstrikes or ground troops to attack their bases. 
Indian and Pakistani forces exchanged fire again along the Line of Control separating them in Kashmir overnight, Indian officials said Tuesday.
The firing is the latest in a series of skirmishes along the de facto frontier created by previous border wars.
Both sides are on high alert. 
The United States is urging New Delhi to complete its inquiry before deciding on retaliation. 
Since Sept. 11, President Bush has actively embraced both Pakistan and India.
Now Mr. Bush finds himself standing between belligerent neighbors in a region the CIA said is the most likely flash point for a nuclear war. 
"You've got two major nuclear weapons states with a series of crises, misperceptions, politicians in both countries denying the legitimacy of the position of the other," says analyst Stephen Cohen of the Brookings Institution.
"I think there is a significant crisis potential here." 
China also called on India and Pakistan to show restraint. 
China and neighboring Pakistan are long-time allies and India has been trying to build better ties with Beijing, with whom it has fought over border disputes. 
Musharraf is due in China Thursday. 
In Pakistan, no one is publicly defending the attack on the Parliament, but commentators are urging restraint from India, citing Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf's pledge to punish those responsible if he is presented with credible evidence. 
"This time India is exploiting the U.S. precedent of attacking first and talking later and has played on the theme of terrorism to earn world sympathy," the Nation, an English-language newspaper said Monday. 
"And yet whoever is behind this misguided abortive attack on the Indian Parliament played right into India's hands. 
"This was just the kind of excuse it was waiting for.
That is why all the efforts being made by General Pervez Musharraf to defuse the crisis do not seem to be working."
Congressional negotiators cut a deal late Tuesday that will funnel about $10.7 billion to New York City to help with the World Trade Center aftermath. 
The total is a little more than half the $20 billion President Bush promised to New York City in the days following the Sept. 11 attacks.
The White House budget office has said that New York will still receive the full $20 billion and likely more than that but not all at once.
President Bush had pledged to veto more spending this year. 
"It will meet our needs now," Sen. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., said of the agreement. 
He compared arduous day-by-day negotiations to secure the aid with the siege on Stalingrad. 
Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton, D-N.Y., said the pact "represents a substantial down payment in meeting our needs over the long term.
" 
Losses in New York are ultimately expected to top $100 billion, although that figure will be offset by insurance. 
The two largest components of the New York aid package are $6.2 billion to pay the city's cleanup costs and $2.7 billion in economic development and business aid. 
Of that $2.7 billion, $500 million is set aside specifically for residents and small business in lower Manhattan below Canal Street, the hardest-hit area. 
Congress must still vote on the deal, which was inked by congressional negotiators who were reconciling House and Senate spending bills.
A vote is expected later this week. 
The deal also includes $140 million for the city's hospitals to help them with costs related to Sept. 11.
Another $175 million is earmarked for workers' compensation costs, and $100 million is for security and safety repairs to the Hudson River train tunnels. 
Schumer and Clinton said they will need to push again for more funding next year.
Among the highest priorities will be an extension of unemployment benefits, which will be due to expire for trade center victims in March.
Another is federal reimbursement for costs associated with COBRA, the health insurance available to displaced workers. 
The senators also want to obtain more money for Medicaid, the health insurance program for the poor, to deal with rolls that are expected to swell because of the sluggish economy. 
Still unclear is whether Congress will ultimately approve a stimulus package that will include help for New York.
Schumer and Clinton have pushed through a $5 billion plan in the U.S. Senate that relies on tax credits for residents and businesses downtown.
A separate $6.1 billion plan passed in the House sponsored by Rep. Amo Houghton, R-Corning, relies on tax-exempt bonds and other tax breaks. 
Of the total aid package agreed to Tuesday, $8.2 billion was secured by Congress and $2.9 billion was provided for in a pot of money over which President Bush has discretion.
A House-Senate compromise on a $20 billion anti-terrorism package is near, leaving congressional leaders hoping that this is the week the measure can finally be pushed through Congress. 
Bargainers from the two chambers neared agreement on the plan on Monday.
It would heed President Bush's demand that it not exceed $20 billion, but provide less than he sought for defense and more than he proposed for domestic security and helping New York and other communities rebuild from the Sept. 11 attacks. 
Top lawmakers from the two chambers were tentatively planning to complete the agreement on Tuesday.
That would clear the major remaining hurdle to Congress finishing its must-pass spending legislation and adjourning for the year, which leaders hope to do by week's end. 
The anti-terrorism package is attached to a $318 billion defense bill for the new fiscal year.
The two other remaining spending measures are one for health, education and labor programs, and a second for foreign aid. 
Mr. Bush had repeatedly threatened to veto an anti-terrorism measure exceeding $20 billion.
He has said the measure provides enough money now for the war in Afghanistan and the battle against terrorism, and that he will seek more funds early next year if necessary. 
Under heavy White House pressure, the House and Senate blocked Democrats in recent weeks from advancing packages worth at least $15 billion more. 
Yet the mix of spending the bargainers were discussing described by officials familiar with the talks who spoke on condition of anonymity tilted more toward Democrats. 
It would cut the $7.3 billion for the military that Mr. Bush wanted to roughly $3.5 billion to $4 billion, the officials said.
The Democratic-controlled Senate provided $2 billion for defense. 
Click here for a closer look at the Bush presidency.
Click here for a look at the 107th U.S. Congress. 
In addition, a bit less than $8.5 billion would be set aside for domestic security programs, and about the same amount would be provided for the New York and Washington areas, where jets smashed into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
Western Pennsylvania, where a fourth jetliner crashed, would get a small portion of those rebuilding funds. 
The exact defense figure would depend on whether money for the National Guard and rebuilding of the Pentagon were counted as spending for the military, and how much was provided for those efforts, the officials said. 
Mr. Bush proposed spending $4.4 billion for domestic security and $6.3 billion for the affected communities.
The Senate approved $8.5 billion for domestic security and $9.5 billion for New York and Virginia. 
The tentative package would include $2.5 billion for public health and countering bio-terrorism, about $1 billion more than the president proposed. 
The $20 billion for anti-terrorism programs is half the $40 billion that Congress approved just days after the Sept. 11 attacks.
Mr. Bush controls half the total, but the new legislation must be enacted detailing how the other half will be spent. 
All $40 billion was to come from what was once a projected federal surplus for this year.
White House and congressional officials now expect a deficit this year, the first since 1997.
Fans of the St. Louis Rams will have to go without bottled beer at home games for the rest of the season - and bottled soda and water could also be banned. 
That's according to the St. Louis Post-Dispatch. 
"It's all about safety," Bob Wallace, the Rams' senior vice president for administration, told the newspaper. "
These bottles can hurt someone seriously, especially little kids." 
On Sunday, fans interrupted an NFL game in Cleveland by throwing objects, including partially filled plastic beer bottles, onto the field.
The same thing happened in New Orleans Monday night during the Rams' 34-21 win against the Saints. 
Both times, the fans were unhappy with officials' calls. 
Most of the objects thrown onto the field in both cases were plastic beer bottles, Wallace said, although there were a few bottles containing water or soda.
Wallace said the club will decide by Dec. 30 - the date of the team's next home game - if the dome's concessionaire will also continue to sell plastic bottles of water and soda. 
Miller Lite in plastic bottles makes up just 2 percent of beer sales at the Dome at America's Center; the local Budweiser brands sold only in paper cups dominate. 
Fans who make the trip to this weekend's game between the Rams and the Carolina Panthers in Charlotte will, however, be able to buy beer in plastic bottles.
Panthers spokesman Bruce Speight said the team feels it has enough security in place since Sept. 11 to handle any trouble. 
A spokeswoman for the St. Louis Cardinals said the team is reviewing its policy on bottled beer, but doesn't plan to make a decision anytime soon.
The St. Louis Blues don't sell beer in bottles at the Savvis Center, said spokeswoman Cindy Underwood. 
As for bottled water, she told the Post-Dispatch, "I think there is a difference between beer and water."
'A, Yemen (CNN) --
Yemeni security forces pursued suspected members of Osama bin Laden's al Qaeda network in two locations Tuesday, sources told CNN. 
The sources said Yemeni special forces were sent to Bayhan and Abidha on information provided by intelligence operations. 
No al Qaeda members were captured, but the people believed to have been hosting them in Bayhan were arrested, the sources said.
The special forces were looking for one or two people in that location. 
In Abidha, a gunfight erupted between the Yemeni forces and those suspected of harboring the al Qaeda members.
Sources said people were killed and injured, but had no information on how many or who those casualties were. 
Reuters reported that their sources said 12 people were killed and at least 22 others were wounded when Yemeni forces used helicopters and tanks against the al-Jalal tribe in an area called al-Husoun in the Marib area about 140 kms (84 miles) east of the capital San'a. 
Yemen's interior ministry issued a warning against hiding suspected al Qaeda members and called for cooperation in the hunt for those believed to have fled. 
Yemeni authorities have issued a deadline to turn the suspects over. 
It was the first time that Yemen has resorted to military action against supporters of bin Laden.
Yemen said earlier this month it was hunting down two senior tribesmen that the U.S. suspects of being key agents of bin Laden's al Qaeda network. 
Yemen was the scene of the attack on the USS Cole that killed 17 American sailors.
U.S. officials believe bin Laden was behind the suicide bombing. 
Since September 11, cooperation between San'a and Washington has been increasing. 
Three weeks ago, President Bush met Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh at the White House. 
In October a U.S. official said Yemen had "one of the most significant" al Qaeda organisational links in the world, composed mostly of Yemenis who received military training in Afghanistan. 
Diplomatic sources then told CNN that thousands of veterans of the Soviet-Afghan war are living in Yemen and were capable of launching "uncoordinated or coordinated attacks." 
Yemen's government said it kept a close eye on these so-called "Arab-Afghans," some who lead lawful lives.
The government also said it has deported about 5,000 non-Yemeni Arabs, including Arab-Afghan fighters, since 1998, the year of the embassy bombings. 
While some Yemenis who fought the Soviet occupation in Afghanistan are recognized as senior opposition politicians, other "Arab-Afghans" were said to be a focus of a Yemeni government crackdown. 
In October the government said it has held many for questioning, including anyone travelling to and from Pakistan, which a U.S. official describes as "a door" to Afghanistan for al Qaeda sympathizers. 
agents stayed behind in San'a to continue investigations into the October 2000 attack on the USS Cole in the Yemeni port of Aden. 
One link was said to be Khalid al-Midhar. 
Al-Midhar has been identified by the U.S. Justice Department as one of the three hijackers on board American Airlines Flight 77, which crashed into the Pentagon.
For the first time in nearly 40 years, ships carrying tons of food from the United States arrived in Havana's harbor Sunday -- a move some American farmers and exporters hope will help open Cuban markets. 
The shipments are part of a one-time $30 million purchase of U.S. food by the Cuban government in the wake of a devastating hurricane that hit the island early last month. 
A ship called the Express brought in 500 tons of frozen chicken legs into Cuba's capital, Havana.
Another ship, the Ikan Mazatlan, transported 24,000 metric tons of corn grown in nine Midwestern states. 
"It's our hope that these initial shipments and sales to Cuba will serve the purpose of proving the point that it's a logical thing for Cuba and the United States to trade with one another," said Larry Cunningham, senior vice president of the Archer Daniels Midland Co., a U.S.-based agribusiness firm involved in the Cuban shipments. 
But political obstacles may prevent such developments, as they have in the past.
The relationship between the United States and Cuba has been strained since communist leader Fidel Castro took control of the Mediterranean island on January 1, 1959. 
Although the United States has maintained an economic embargo on Cuba for decades, U.S. law does allow shipments of food and medicine to the communist-controlled island.
But the Cuban government has long refused to buy American food because of the restrictions, including a ban on direct U.S. financing of food sales. 
Under the embargo, U.S. ships could only dock in Cuba if they carried a special license from the U.S. Treasury Department.
Other nations' ships that have dropped anchor in Cuban ports must also obtain a license from the Treasury in order to dock in a U.S. port after leaving Cuba -- or else wait six months. 
Sunday's shipment followed a string of diplomatic gestures, including a U.S. offer of humanitarian aid days after Hurricane Michelle struck Cuba in early November. 
A category 4 storm with winds of 135 mph
, Michelle killed five people, caused major damage in eight provinces and the Isle of Youth, and devastated the country's telecommunications system.
The storm also caused extensive damage to the country's electrical infrastructure and wiped out tens of thousands of homes. 
Cuban officials have insisted that the food purchase is a one-time event needed to deal with the aftermath of Hurricane Michelle. 
But Pedro Alvarez, president of Alimport, a state-run import firm in Cuba, said that the shipment demonstrates the potential value of the Cuban market to U.S. producers -- and, he said, the folly of the embargo. 
"American companies are being blocked by their own laws, which don't allow them to participate in the Cuban market," he said.
U.S. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld has warned NATO it must prepare for terrorists who will use everything from computers to cruise missiles to wreak havoc. 
"The attacks on New York and Washington D.C. are a vivid reminder to us all that the world remains a dangerous place," he told a news conference after a meeting of NATO defense ministers in Brussels. 
"We discussed the need to prepare for a full range of asymmetric threats -- including terrorism, cyber attacks, advanced conventional weapons, cruise missiles, ballistic missiles and certainly weapons of mass destruction," he said. 
"In particular I emphasized the threat posed by terrorist movements and terrorist states that are seeking weapons of mass destruction. 
"I expressed our concern with the overlap between the listed states that sponsor terrorism, and terrorist networks, given the fact that a large number of the so-called terrorist states have active chemical, biological and or nuclear programs. 
"The nexus between states with weapons of mass destruction and terrorist weapons raises the danger that September 11 could be a preview of what could come if the enemies of freedom gain the ability to strike our nations with weapons of greater power." 
Speaking earlier, NATO Secretary-General George Robertson said the alliance had to shelve Cold War reflexes and be prepared to face a new war on global terrorism. 
He said: "What was previously an abstract possibility became on September 11 an appalling reality and our security environment must now be seen in a fundamentally different and considerably darker light. 
"We've only just begun what must be a further adaptation of the alliance to meet the new security challenges that we face." 
Rumsfeld was expected to brief allies on the campaign against the Taliban and the al Qaeda network, blamed for the September 11 attacks on the United States. 
Russian Defence Minister Sergei Ivanov, also in Brussels, will be discussing with NATO plans for closer relations between the former adversaries.
Rumsfeld met Ivanov separately on Monday night. 
Earlier this month, NATO foreign ministers instructed alliance officials to begin setting up a new council where Russia could join the allies in discussion, planning and even decision-making. 
This week, the defence ministers were to begin considering what subjects the new NATO-Russia council might cover. 
Also on the agenda is the Balkans, where the alliance is leading about 60,000 troops in three separate military operations, in Bosnia, Kosovo and Macedonia. 
The ministers will be looking at ways to make the Balkans operations more efficient to reduce their size.
The head of Afghanistan's interim government is due to meet the country's former ruler for talks paving the way for the exiled monarch's return. 
Hamid Karzai will meet former King Mohammad Zahir Shah, who has lived in exile in Rome since 1973, in the Italian capital on Tuesday. 
Karzai told reporters on his arrival in Rome that he believed an international peace force was likely to arrive in Kabul before his government takes office on Saturday. 
"I can't give you a date
but I believe they will," Karzai said. 
His words echoed a senior U.S. official in Kabul who had said advance troops from an international peace force would arrive in Kabul in time for the government to take office. 
Zahir Shah, 87, is due to return home within months to open a Loya Jirga, or grand council, to map out the country's future as part of a U.N.-sponsored peace plan. 
The ex-king is seen as a key player in trying to unite Afghans, at least symbolically. 
Karzai is also expected to hold talks with other members of the king's small group of relatives and advisers, including the former monarch's son, Mir Wais Zahir. 
Karzai, 46, leader of the Pashtun Popalzai tribe, was named on December 5 to head the interim administration that will rule Afghanistan for six months and prepare the way for a transitional government that will take power for the following two years. 
He was nominated for the interim post by the so-called Rome group and benefited from being a member of the dominant ethnic Pashtun group that many felt were not fully represented at the Bonn conference that brought together representatives of most of Afghanistan's anti-Taliban political players. 
The details of the proposed multi-national peace force's make-up have yet to be announced, but British Prime Minister Tony Blair said on Monday that Britain would contribute up to 1,500 troops to the peace force and was prepared in principle to lead it. 
The force, to guard the peace in the capital city Kabul and possibly other locations, was a key part of the peace deal signed in Germany which paved the way for the new post-Taliban interim administration to take power. 
Since then, the Northern Alliance, which now controls the capital, has said it wants to see no more than 1,000 foreign troops with a tightly defined mandate, mainly to guard government meetings. 
But countries expected to contribute troops have discussed a much larger force with a more robust mission. 
Blair told the House of Commons that several nations had indicated they were willing to contribute troops, including a number of EU countries, Canada, Australia, Argentina, Jordan and New Zealand. 
U.S. special envoy to Afghanistan James Dobbins said that parts of the security force should be in place by the time Afghanistan's interim government takes power on December 22. 
"I anticipate that at least lead elements of it will be here," Dobbins said.
"There will be advance elements of the force that should be here by the 22nd." 
Dobbins declined to say how many troops would be involved but hinted that the number would not be dramatically high. 
U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell has indicated that some U.S. personnel currently stationed in Afghanistan will stay in the country in a peacekeeping role once an international security force was in place. 
"U.S. troops will stay there until they have accomplished their mission, which is to defeat the Taliban, well under way; destroy al-Qaida, well under way; and do everything they can to find Osama bin Laden," Powell said on Sunday.
Hamid Karzai, chosen to lead the new Afghanistan, has said he felt the great weight of his task but vowed to end terrorism, "warlordism" and the rule of the gun in a country he wants to rebuild almost from scratch. 
"I am very, very determined...
Terrorism has made our people suffer unbelievably difficult times," he said in a late-night interview in Rome with Reuters Television. 
Speaking at a hotel in the Italian capital soon after he had received the encouragement of Afghanistan's exiled former king, Karzai also said he would be happy with a foreign peacekeeping force of any size necessary to be beneficial to his country. 
"They have killed us," he said of the ousted Taliban and their foreign allies in Osama bin Laden's al Qaeda network. 
"They have destroyed our orchards.
They have destroyed our vineyards.
They tried to destroy Afghanistan. 
"They tried to destroy the essence of Afghans.
I am very determined to get rid of them, not only in Afghanistan but in the rest of the world too." 
Earlier, Karzai had received the blessing and the personal Koran of the ex-king, Mohammad Zahir Shah. 
"That was a tremendous, good gesture and a very good blessing," Karzai said. 
Karzai, who was expected to return to Kabul later on Wednesday, said he felt the enormous load of his responsibility but that the possibility of success was great because of the backing of the international community. 
He said he was not daunted by the challenge of trying to unify Afghanistan, where many of the groups that ousted the hardline Taliban from power were bitter foes of the past. 
Memories are still fresh of the ethnic conflict of the early 1990s, when street battles between rival warlords, Tajiks and Hazaras, Uzbeks and Pashtuns, reduced much of Kabul to rubble. 
Karzai said he hoped there could be agreement on the size of an international peacekeeping force, adding that he would accept "any number that makes the task feasible, the task beneficial." 
But he also stressed: "There is total agreement by all concerned that Afghanistan must have a national army that should be totally under the control of the Ministry of Defence and a national police force under the total control of the Ministry of the Interior." 
"Warlordism must end and the rule of the gun must end in Afghanistan and the Afghan people must be able to choose their destiny themselves and have their government chosen themselves." 
Karzai was asked what he would tell bin Laden if he were in the same room with the Saudi militant whom Washington has blamed for the September attacks against the United States. 
"I won't meet him in the same room.
I'll have him arrested before he reaches my room and have him tried," he said. 
"Anywhere.
Anywhere that he can see the evils that he has done to the people of the world and to the Afghan people, that the Afghan people finally get some justice for what he and his friend Mullah Omar did to Afghanistan and to the rest of the world," he said, referring also to the fugitive Taliban leader. 
Former king Zahir Shah, who said he had given Karzai "lots of advice" during their meeting on Tuesday night, is due to return to Kabul himself next year to open a Loya Jirga, or grand council, to map out the country's future as part of a U.N.-sponsored peace plan. 
"He does not intend to go in any official capacity.
He is now going back to Afghanistan as an Afghan, a great capacity," Karzai said earlier when he met the former king. 
Copyright 2001 Reuters .
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
Congressional leaders expressed guarded optimism Sunday that they can still agree on an economic stimulus package this week before leaving for Christmas. 
Appearing on Sunday talk shows, Democrats and Republicans engaged in partisan tussling over corporate tax cuts, with each side accusing the other of slowing legislation that President Bush has requested. 
"We haven't seen any movement on the Republican part on any of the benefit proposals that we've had on the table," Daschle said on CNN's "Late Edition."
"We've given on just about every one of the issues, but there's been no give back." 
The chief sticking point between Republicans and Democrats is a package of corporate tax cuts the GOP endorses as a stimulus for job growth.
Democrats favor more direct spending, including providing extended unemployment benefits and health insurance to people laid off in the wake of the September 11 terrorist attacks. 
Bush has proposed extending unemployment benefits and giving money to states to help with health insurance for laid-off workers, but he is also pushing for tax cuts.
Those proposals include the repeal of the alternative minimum tax for corporations and speeding up the effective date of individual tax cuts already passed by Congress earlier this year. 
Daschle, who estimated the chances of passing stimulus bill "at least 50-50," said Democrats "will do everything we possibly can to pass a good one, but we're not going to pass a bad one." 
Asked to assess the changes of a stimulus bill passing this week, Armey said, "I think the odds are good.
I'm not sure I can ascribe a number to it." 
"I think everybody's got to ask themselves the question, 'Can I, in good conscience, now fail to complete ... the final details on this deal?'" he said. 
In the economic stimulus package passed by the GOP-controlled House, the alternative minimum tax would be repealed retroactively, back to its 1986 inception.
That has drawn howls from Democrats, who say it would siphon off billions of tax dollars to big corporations.
"Their idea is to give $25 billion to corporations for an alternative minimum tax they paid over the last 15 years, " House Minority Leader Richard Gephardt, D-Missouri, said in a joint "Meet the Press" appearance with Armey.
"They would cut a check for $1 billion for Ford, $1 billion for IBM, all for doing nothing." 
White House Budget Director Mitch Daniels said on CNN's "Late Edition" Sunday that the repeal, which was not in the original Bush proposal, it likely would have to be removed in order to reach a compromise. 
"My guess is that it's not realistic to expect it to be there at the end," he chief said. 
Armey defended the retroactive repeal, noting that it would apply to 23,000 businesses across the country, not just major corporations, and would stimulate job growth.
He also indicated House Republicans would resist moves to abandon the proposal. 
"It's not about cutting taxes.
It's not about redistributing income," he said.
"It's about putting somebody back on the job that's gone off the job in the last few weeks." 
The Senate comes back into session Monday, and will begin debate of the House-Senate education bill conference report, which Daschle said he hopes to have passed by Tuesday. 
The House will be in session Monday but will consider no bills on the floor.
Members of both chambers still hope to adjourn for the year by the end of the week, freeing them to head home for a multi-week holiday break.
The man who will lead Afghanistan away from Taliban rule met Tuesday in Rome with Afghanistan's former king, in exile since 1973. 
Hamid Karzai, 46, leader of the Pashtun Popalzai tribe, was named to head the interim administration that is to rule Afghanistan for six months and prepare the way for a transitional government to take power for the following two years. 
The former king, Zahir Shah, 87, is to return home within months to open a grand council to map out the country's future as part of a United Nations-sponsored peace plan. 
's
Rome Bureau Chief Alessio Vinci spoke by phone with anchor Judy Woodruff about what the two leaders may discuss.
ANCHOR JUDY WOODRUFF:
Hello, Alessio.
I should say good evening, because it is nighttime where you are. 
: It is nighttime and it is very cold here in Rome today, Judy.
And that man who will lead the administration, Hamid Karzai, and the former king are meeting as we speak inside a villa just outside of the city center in Rome.
And the two are likely discussing plans for that interim administration, which Mr. Karzai will lead beginning this coming Saturday. 
But this visit to Rome is particularly important because it will pave the way for the return of the former king to Afghanistan, after spending 23 years in exile here.
An aide to the king told me earlier today that the monarch will be back in Kabul before the end of March next year. 
The former king has an important role to play in that country.
He is considered a unifying figure and a man many Afghan people respect.
And Mr. Karzai will certainly need such a personality in Afghanistan after more than two decades of civil war.
The former king has made clear he is not going to restore a monarchy in Afghanistan. 
He will, however, have the institutional role of convening a national assembly of tribal leaders or leaders, also known in Afghanistan as Loya Jirga, which is a body in charge of setting up a broad-based transitional administration until elections will be called -- perhaps in two years time. 
In the meantime, Mr. Karzai will lead a provisional administration for the next six months.
Security is the main issue for now, and that is why the international community will send to the capital, Kabul, a peacekeeping force to help Karzai's administration maintain peace and stability there.
The first members of that force may begin to arrive an as early as the end of this week.
And a contingent of some 600 Italian soldiers will arrive just after Christmas. 
: I believe I read that Hamid Karzai and the exiled king had been in touch before -- that they perhaps had a longstanding relationship.
They had worked together in the past.
Do we know very much about how familiar they are with one another? 
: Well, they are pretty familiar.
Actually, the family of Hamid Karzai was very close to the former king.
And I do believe the father of Mr. Karzai was also a part of the political administration there during the king's time in power there in Afghanistan.
I also know that Mr. Karzai has come to Rome several times prior to the September 11 attacks to try to organize this assembly of elder leaders that would have replaced (the gogovernmentif the Taliban were to fall from power. 
So the two leaders have been in touch for quite some time.
And this is the first time Mr. Karzai has come to Rome since the September 11 attacks.
The two men are very familiar with each other.
Neither of the two types of lesions President Bush recently had removed from his face contained cancer cells, but one is of a type that medical research has shown could develop into cancer. 
The president had four lesions removed from his face last week -- two "actinic keratoses" from his cheeks and two "seborrheic keratoses" from his forehead and temple, the White House revealed Monday. 
A White House doctor used liquid nitrogen to remove the lesions Friday. 
Actinic keratoses are precancerous cells.
In about 10 percent of cases, the cells can transform into squamous-cell carcinoma, the second-most-common skin cancer, which affects some 200,000 people a year, according to the Skin Cancer Foundation. 
The precancerous growths are most commonly found on men between 50 and 60, but can afflict anyone who has a fair complexion, light-colored hair and has had a lot of exposure to the sun, said CNN Medical Correspondent Dr. Sanjay Gupta. 
Lesions are typically found on sun-exposed body parts-- the face, ears, bald scalp, neck and arms -- and develop as rough-textured, scaly or crusty bumps.
Doctors can usually determine the type of growth by its appearance. 
The president's lesions were in their "very early" stages of development and were similar to three lesions removed from the president's face during his August physical, a White House statement said. 
"Given the prevalence and benign nature of the lesions, standard procedure is freezing the lesions with liquid nitrogen," the statement said.
"No biopsies were indicated, nor were any taken." 
Red spots were visible on the president's face Monday during his only public event -- an appearance at the White House with several Muslim children to mark the end of the holy month of Ramadan. 
The other type of lesion Bush had removed, seborrheic keratoses, are sometimes called "barnacles of old age."
While their cause is unclear, they become more numerous with age, research has shown.
They are benign and are removed for cosmetic reasons or if they become irritated.
Two U.S. military C-130 transport planes originally believed to have come under fire from surface-to-air missiles in separate incidents were not attacked, U.S. officials said Tuesday after a further analysis of information. 
According to Marines Maj.
Ralph Mills, with the U.S. Central Command in Florida, the muzzle flashes seen coming from the ground are now thought to have been part of the Eid al-Fitr celebrations marking the end of the Muslim fasting month of Ramadan. 
's
Mike Chinoy is based at the U.S. Marine camp in Kandahar.
He filed this report. 
: What the U.S. Marines here are saying is that those two C-130 planes saw flashes on the ground, and acted as if they were being fired on, which of course, when you're flying over Afghanistan in the dead of night, is the prudent thing to do. 
The pilot did see flashes coming from the ground.
Their initial reaction was that it might well be Stinger anti-aircraft missiles.
The Taliban certainly have a number of Stingers in their possession and there are Taliban and al Qaeda fighters still at large in the area. 
The indications now are that it might have been Afghans just firing off weapons marking the Eid festival that comes at the end of Ramadan. 
In any event, the C-130 did take evasive action and fired flares just to be safe.
Of course, nothing happened to it.
But this episode does underscore the continuing danger that is presented to the Marines.
They are flying a dozen or more C-130 flights in and out of Kandahar every night, and all the flying is done at night.
Both the helicopters and the transport planes don't want to present any kind of easy target because they know there is danger out there. 
: Any updates on the whereabouts of Mullah Omar this morning? 
: I asked the Marines about that; they say they don't have anything more to add.
There were reports he was holed up somewhere in this part of Afghanistan and that the local Afghan authorities are now chasing him.
The U.S. Marines are not playing any role in that. 
The focus here today at Kandahar airport has been on getting the new detention center ready.
A couple of hundred yards from where I'm standing is a corrugated iron shed surrounded by three layers of barbed wire, and it will be guarded by Marines both inside and outside. 
It's expected to hold between 100 and 300 al Qaeda fighters who have been detained or surrendered during the fighting at Tora Bora.
We're told that some of those detainees may arrive as early as Tuesday night. 
The Marines are eager to ensure that there's no repeat of that bloody prison uprising that Taliban and al Qaeda forces staged in Mazar-e Sharif a few weeks ago.
The detainees here will have their hands and feet bound when they arrive; they'll be searched very thoroughly; they'll be segregated.
They will receive treatment that is standard for prisoners of war under the Geneva Convention. 
There is an eight-member FBI team here to question those prisoners.
The FBI tells us that they're most interested in learning anything they can about future al Qaeda terrorist acts planned against American targets.
The FBI agents are also looking for any evidence of past al Qaeda attacks -- not only on the World Trade Center, but the attack on the U.S.S. Cole in the waters off Yemen, and the bombing of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, as well.
Following is a transcripted excerpt from Fox News Sunday, December 16, 2001. 
: Now joining us to talk about America at war and the quest for peace is Secretary of State Colin Powell. 
Secretary Powell, we've heard reports, first, of Al Qaeda being vanquished.
To your knowledge, is that true or is that simply a preliminary report? 
U.S. SECRETARY OF STATE:
It seems to be the case.
I can't confirm it yet.
We'll wait to hear from the U.S. intelligence sources and our people on the ground as to whether that is the case. 
I'm sure there are still some remaining caves that have to be looked at, and there'll be some light resistance left.
But for the most part, it appears that we're well on our way to success on this part of the campaign. 
: Now, you've said in the past you think we're going to get bin Laden.
Do you still believe that? 
: We will get bin Laden.
Whether it's today, tomorrow, a year from now, two years from now, the president has made it clear that we will not rest until he is brought to justice or justice brought to him. 
The president has also made it clear from the beginning we shouldn't just see this in the form of "get him right away and that takes care of it.
" Our mission was to go after him but really after Al Qaeda.
Al Qaeda's being destroyed in Afghanistan.
Now we have to destroy it wherever it exists around the world. 
: I want to get to that, but a couple more questions first about bin Laden.
Do we believe he's still in Afghanistan? 
: We really don't know.
There's some information that suggests he might still be there, and he might have gotten across the border.
We don't know.
But you can be sure he is under hot pursuit. 
: The former head of the Pakistani intelligence service actually was saying the other day that he thought the bin Laden video might have been a fraud. 
: Now, this is a man who in the past has been supportive of the Taliban. 
Do you still worry that there are remnants of the old intelligence service in Pakistan that could be lending aid and shelter to bin Laden? 
: I wouldn't go that far.
I'm sure there are elements of the intelligence service from the old days who might still have a warm spot in their heart and head for Usama bin Laden. 
But I know that President Musharraf doesn't and the leadership of Pakistan does not.
They have been solidly aligned with us in this campaign against bin Laden.
And as Geraldo noted, they have been very, very forceful in reinforcing their border with their military to keep him and Al Qaeda leaders from escaping into Pakistan. 
: Now, we saw tape the other day of bin Laden boasting about his triumphs and even predicting widespread carnage during Ramadan.
Didn't happen.
Do you think he's a coward? 
: Yes, he's a coward.
Anybody who hides behind faith to commit murder is a coward.
And he goes after the innocent, he goes after those who are defenseless.
And he is evil, he's a murderer, he's a coward.
And now he's on the run. 
: Throughout the Arab world there's been a lot of discussion about the bin Laden video.
Do you think the video enlarged him as a figure or diminished him? 
: I think over time it diminishes him.
Because anybody who watched that video, even if they might say, oh, looks, like ?
you know, I still think there's something to him or it might have been a fraud, when they get home late at night and when they reflect on it in the days that follow, they will have to come to the conclusion that they really saw a murderer.
They really saw somebody who is misusing this wonderful faith called Islam. 
: A number of people have said that they would like to see bin Laden tried before an international tribunal or even in an American criminal court.
Do you think either of those is an appropriate forum? 
: Well, I think, first things first.
Let's get him in custody of somebody, and then we can decide how best to bring him to justice.
And I think it's at that time we'll determine what the best forum is to put him before. 
But he has to be brought to justice, brought to justice in a way that the whole world can see the evidence arrayed against him and watch as the international community decides what to do with him. 
: The international community, sort of a war tribunal? 
: Or, whatever ?
no, I don't know.
I don't want to rule out anything or rule in anything.
There are lots of ways that you can deal with a bin Laden.
There have been international criminal tribunals.
We have our military tribunal that the president recently created.
Though I would not prejudge at this point what we might do with Mr. bin Laden if he were brought to our custody. 
: Now, are you disappointed that they didn't get him today? 
: Sure.
But I would have liked to have seen him gotten a week ago or a month ago.
The fact of the matter is we understand the nature of the battle we're in.
And he is elusive.
He will try to stay hidden.
He will try to avoid us. 
But let there be no doubt in anyone's mind that the president is determined that however long it takes, as he says to us almost every day, one day, one week, one month, two years, we will get him.
Let's be patient and just not give up. 
: Let's talk about the broader battle.
Al Qaeda spread over 55, 60 nations.
There have been reports, for instance, that U.S. forces are preparing to do some joint work with the government of the Philippines with the aid and support of that government, correct? 
: Well, we're working with many governments to point out to them where they could do a better job of going after Al Qaeda, or calling to their attention information, intelligence facts we have with respect to what's happening in their country. 
And we've been very pleased at the level of cooperation and response we've received from countries now that they see what Al Qaeda is all about.
And that is also the case with the Philippines.
We have good cooperation with the Philippines. 
: How many nations right now, like the Philippines, have vested interest in getting rid of Al Qaeda on their shores because they see it as a direct threat to their survival? 
: I think every nation that has an Al Qaeda cell should see it as a direct threat to their sovereignty, to their security and to their ability to participate in an international community that's going to move forward and leave this kind of terrorist activity behind. 
So it's in the interest of every single country that might be touched by Al Qaeda to rip it out, get rid of it, because nothing good will come from harboring or providing haven to Al Qaeda or other terrorist organizations. 
: Do you think Al Qaeda can get routed out by any other means than simply going after them militarily as we've done in Afghanistan? 
: There are many means; sometimes it's military, sometimes it's financial. 
What you have to do is make it an inhospitable place for terrorists to operate ? because your police are watching them and taking action against them, because your intelligence and law enforcement and financial communities are going after them.
They need a warm, wet place, if I can use a biological term, a dark, warm, wet place in order to survive. 
And if you put the light on them, and if you dry up their sources, and if you make it less hospitable, then they'll have to find somewhere else to go.
And we want to make sure there are fewer somewhere elses for them to go over time. 
: There are a lot of predictions at the outset of this combat that the Arab street would rise up in rage. 
: Well, there have been, you know, some demonstrations, and there were some difficulties in the early days.
But once people saw that we were, one, serious about it, two, it was not anti-Islam or anti-Arab, it was anti-terrorist, anti-murderer; and I think as more and more people learned about the nature of the crimes that Usama bin Laden committed, that rage, that potential rage, was dissipated.
And so people now understand what we were all about. 
And when they also see us committed to bringing in place a new government that will represent all the people of Afghanistan, and providing support to that government, making a commitment for humanitarian relief and the rebuilding of Afghanistan, people are starting to come to the realization that this was a noble cause. 
: All right.
Let me backtrack, just one more thing I want to get to with bin Laden. 
Let's suppose he's gotten into Pakistan.
Do we have permission to go in and chase him? 
: Well, Pakistan is a sovereign country, of course, and we are in constant touch with the Pakistani authorities.
They have very competent troops, and I'm sure that if information is passed to them about where he is, they'd go after him.
The last thing they want to do is provide him with a safe haven. 
And if it's a situation of hot pursuit, I'm sure that we have in place mechanisms where we would not have any difficulty cooperating with the Pakistanis in his apprehension. 
: Well, as a matter of fact, they've given us ?
we have forces based there at this point. 
: We have forces that are using facilities in Pakistan. 
: All right.
Now, as we think about fighting the war on terror, a lot of people think of the next step.
Obviously, it's go to after Al Qaeda, but Al Qaeda is not the only terrorist organization on the planet.
There are others. 
Widespread reports that Iraq has weapons of mass destruction.
There's some controversy about that, though.
Do we have absolute proof that Saddam has weapons of mass destruction? 
: There is no question that he's trying to develop weapons of mass destruction.
Based on our success at the time of the Gulf War, his conventional capability is less than half of what it used to be and he can't project that conventional power. 
But he continues to look for unconventional power.
We believe his nuclear capability has been capped, but he's still trying to regenerate it, but it's years away.
Chemical weapons, there's no question that he has some remaining stock, and he may be trying to generate that again.
And biological weapons are the greatest concern to us because he's always expressed an interest in that kind of weapon, and it's easier to hide that kind of capability. 
That's why it's important that we continue to press with the U.N. inspectors getting back in on their terms to do the kind of inspection they can do for as long as it takes to see whether or not he's complying or not. 
Now, he won't let those inspectors back in, the sanctions remain in place, the sanctions get tighter.
And at the same time the United States continues to pursue a policy that will hopefully lead to regime change at some point. 
: So, you don't think he represents a clear and present danger to us right now? 
: He is a danger to the region.
I don't see his armies marching anywhere, but anybody who has demonstrated previously his willingness to use chemical weapons against his neighbors and his own people has got to be seen as a potential danger to the region. 
: It's often said that in that region of the world the way you get respect is you be tough and you pay off on the things you say.
So for the United States now to keep the respect it's earned so far in Afghanistan
we have to continue to pay off things we've talked about.
We've talked a lot about Saddam Hussein. 
Does it have to be a goal of our policy to have, as you just said, a regime change? 
: It is a goal.
It is our policy.
It's been our policy for a number of years, at least three years in a very explicit sense, and it remains our policy now. 
How to achieve that goal and how to pursue that policy is a matter of means.
What means does one use?
And what will actually work?
And we are constantly reviewing ideas, plans, concepts. 
: The Iraqi National Congress in the North, you've got Shi'a groups in the south.
Could they both form the kind of allies that we have seen with the Northern Alliance and also the Eastern Alliance in Pashtun tribes in Afghanistan? 
: We're looking at that.
It's quite a different situation.
I mean, it's much, much different.
And I think one has to be careful before you take a cookie cutter from other theater and apply it to another theater.
But everything that you have just suggested and other ideas are constantly under review within the administration. 
: And our allies sometimes say, well, we may not go along with you.
Even if allies don't go along with us and we decide it's a proper course, we'll do it? 
: The United States will do what it believes is necessary and appropriate to defend its national security interests and the interests of its friends and allies. 
It's better ?
I always think it's better if you can bring other people to the table, if you can have a coalition cooperating as we did in Afghanistan and as we did in the Gulf War.
But the United States does not rule out acting in its own interests unilaterally where that seems to be necessary. 
: Let's move to the Middle East.
Anthony Zinni has been recalled.
Do you want to consult with him?
Did Yasser Arafat break his word in terms of trying to suppress violence in the West Bank and Gaza? 
: We have been pressing Mr. Arafat repeatedly ?
I've been doing it since this administration came into office ?
to get the violence down so that we can get back to a path to peace.
And we've given him many opportunities. 
The Mitchell plan, when it was announced, had a road map to peace discussions.
George Tenet, our CIA director, went out there and created a work plan to get to the cease-fire.
I went out there and tried to do the same thing. 
And then last month we gave a comprehensive statement of the U.S. policy.
The president at the United Nations General Assembly recognized the need to have a vision that would lead to a Palestinian state, and he called it "Palestine." 
A week later in Louisville, Kentucky, I gave a comprehensive speech that laid out what both sides had to do and the aspirations of both sides, and both sides reacted positively to that speech.
They both created security committees that were going to work together.
I sent General Zinni out as our envoy to make this happen.
We started to see some progress. 
What happened?
Hamas, a terrorist organization, started killing innocent civilians with car bombs in Jerusalem, Haifa and elsewhere.
And they attacked this process; they attacked innocent Israelis.
But even more fundamentally and troubling, they attacked Yasser Arafat and his authority to lead the Palestinian people toward a cease-fire and a process of peace. 
Arafat has to respond to this challenge.
And so far he hasn't done enough to respond to this challenge.
And we have been saying to him directly, you've got to do something about this or else we're not going to go anywhere. 
: He's got a whole lot more troops than Hamas has. 
: He has.
He has a large security force.
It's an armed security force.
And this morning he will be... 
: Should he use it? 
: Yes. 
This morning he will be making a statement on how he sees the way forward.
And I hope he will give a statement that says let's stop the intifada,
let's stop the violence, let's stop the incitement, and let's find a way to get back to a path to a cease-fire, so that we can get negotiations toward peace. 
: Now, Dennis Ross, who used to be the envoy to the region, has a piece in The Washington Post today.
He says, "The United States ought to push that along by delivering an ultimatum to Arafat, dealing with Hamas and Islamic Jihad," saying, you've got to shut these down, we give you 96 hours.
Is that a realistic timetable, four days? 
: Four days, I'm not going to comment on a particular timetable.
We have given that message to Mr. Arafat.
I've given it to him repeatedly, directly, me to him, over the last several weeks, that he is being attacked and his authority is being destroyed by Hamas and the PIJ, and he's got to respond to this and other kinds of elements within the Palestinian community that are destroying the vision of the Palestinian people to have their own state. 
: If Arafat does not respond ? you have said he's relevant so far ?
if he doesn't, does he become irrelevant? 
: If he doesn't, he's not leading, just as the president said.
I don't want to use the term "irrelevant," because it is not for us to decide who the leader of the Palestinian people will be.
They have given to Yasser Arafat that leadership role, and he is the legitimate government of the Palestinian Authority. 
Now, as long as he has that governmental role, and as long as he's seen that way by the Palestinian people, we will have to work with him and deal with him. 
: So you have said that, if he doesn't act, that you ?
you used the phrase, "he needs to act or else.
" Is the "or else" that (inaudible) takes over? 
: The "or else" is, we continue in a state of violence, with both sides losing innocent civilians every single day, and it leads nowhere.
It does not lead to a cease-fire.
It does not lead to negotiations on the basis of U.N. Resolutions 242 and 338, in order to find a solution, so that these two peoples can live together in this land. 
: Now, there have been many cases where American officials have talked to Yasser Arafat, many occasions where he's disappointed them.
What is the consequence this time if there's not an end to violence and provocation from Hamas and Islamic Jihad? 
: I think the consequence for him is that he will slowly lose authority within the region. 
: But what will we do? 
: Well, we'll ?
I'm not going to tell you what we're going to do before we decide what we're going to do. 
But we will be examining all of our options of how we deal with him. 
: But right now, I don't want to lose hope.
The Zinni mission has not failed; the parties have failed.
Zinni went to help them, and they were not ?
were not ready, they were not ready to be helped at this point. 
So I brought General Zinni back for consultations.
He remains our envoy.
He was always going to come back in December for consultations and for ?
you can't stay there forever without coming back occasionally. 
And he'll be ready to go back after our consultations and when circumstances suggest that there is a real reason for him to go back. 
: Final question.
There's been a lot of controversy ?
well, two questions.
One, Otto Reich. 
: Otto Reich is the president's nominee to be assistant secretary of state for Western Hemispheric affairs, North and South America, and we stand by that nomination. 
The problem is we cannot get him a hearing before the committee that confirms him, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, because Senator Dodd and other members of the committee will not allow him to have a hearing. 
He's qualified.
He knows the region.
He's a strong leader, and he is the president's nominee. 
: If the Senate goes into recess, would you suggest a recess appointment? 
: This is always an option, but at the moment, we have not made a decision on that. 
: A lot of complaints about the ABM Treaty.
But we've pretty much wired this thing, haven't we? 
I mean, the Russians, they say, well, they're disappointed, it was a mistake, but they're not terribly upset.
The Chinese have issued a few things. 
Have we pretty much wired this so that the people that a lot of folks have said are going to be problems for us are not, in fact, going to be a problem? 
: I think we took the time necessary to establish a good relationship with the Russians.
President Bush, President Putin met four times in the first 11 months of this administration.
I met 16 times with my foreign minister colleague, Igor Ivanov.
Mr. Rumsfeld's done the same thing.
Condi's done the same thing. 
So we created a relationship here, and we kept telling them that we would have to do this if we couldn't find a way around the constraints of the ABM Treaty.
And we finally did have to do it, and we notified them. 
But we also did it in a way that we're cutting offensive weapons at the same time.
So guess what?
There's not going to be an arms race.
Sorry to disappoint those who've been predicting an arms race.
The Russians have agreed with us last week that we're not going to have an arms race. 
And the other that people kept saying is, when you do this, it's going to fracture our relationship with the Russians and just make things terrible.
Guess what?
Both we and the Russians see that we have mutual interests that will keep us working closely together. 
As President Putin said to me last Monday in Moscow when we were discussing this, strategic cooperation with the United States is important.
We will come up with a new framework agreement.
We disagree with your decision on the ABM Treaty, we think you're wrong.
But this is one less disagreement we will have in the future because we have put it behind us, and we will continue to work together.
So, no arms race and no fracture of the relationship with Russia. 
China, we have consulted with them closely.
President Bush talked to President Jiang Zemin.
I brought in the ambassador the day before we made the announcement.
I spoke to my foreign minister colleague, Mr. Tang, that evening.
And they are also in disagreement over our decision.
They don't think we should have done it.
They think it's wrong.
But I don't think we're going to see a crisis in U.S.-Chinese relations. 
: All right.
Secretary of State Colin Powell, thanks for joining us. 
Copyright ?
2001 by eMediaMillWorks,
Inc.
No portion of this transcription may be copied, sold or retransmitted without the express written authority of eMediaMillWorks, Inc.
In what is being hailed as the first step to a school voucher program, the Senate Tuesday stamped its approval on a massive education bill that allows students in underperforming schools to cash in on federal funding to hire private tutors or pay for transportation to better-performing public or charter schools. 
The bill, which passed the House last week, is now set for President Bush's signature. 
The $26.5 billion Elementary and Secondary Education bill does not allow federal funding to be used for private schools ?
a provision stripped from the House bill after protests from teachers unions and Democrats ?
but it does give the ultimatum to schools to shape up or lose the cash along with the student body.
School
voucher advocates call it the first step toward equalizing access for all students.
"Middle- and upper-income Americans have always had the ability to choose their children's schools, either through choice of residence or private education.
Only in the sense that it is being extended to low-income families is school choice 'new,'" said Kaleem Caire, president and CEO of the Black Alliance for Educational Options. 
Caire, who appeared on Capitol Hill with Marquette University Professor Howard Fuller to present their recently published report, Ten Myths about School Choice, said the next step is to allow full voucher programs so students can attend private schools.
But stiff opposition to vouchers remains.
On Friday, the People For the American Way Foundation filed suit in the U.S. Supreme Court, arguing that the city of Cleveland, Ohio's school voucher program is unconstitutional because it endorses religion by making "direct unrestricted government payments to the participating sectarian private schools providing a religious education."
says 82 percent of the private schools participating in the Cleveland voucher program are religious institutions, which means those schools could use federal funds to purchase bibles, icons or other religious materials.
Caire, a guest of Rep. John Boehner, R-Ohio, chairman of the House Education and Workforce Committee, did not address the religious arguments on their face, but said denying the opportunity for low-income students ?
who are disproportionately Black ? to attend private schools is discriminatory.
Boehner, author of the education bill, agreed that equal access is denied to low-income students, but conceded that full education reform has not arrived yet. 
"Parents in low-income communities will immediately have new choices and new options for their children's education, and these options will make a difference for many," Boehner said.
"But the drive for equal educational opportunity in America must continue until all parents of all incomes can choose the best available school for their children ?
public, private or otherwise.
"also demands new accountability standards for public schools based on student testing.
Schools that demonstrate high performance will be given greater flexibility on how they spend federal education dollars.
Fire broke out Tuesday at the world's largest Gothic cathedral, heavily damaging an adjoining gift shop.
The fire at the six-story Cathedral of St. John the Divine in New York, which has been under construction for more than a century, was brought under control within 2 hours. 
Part of the roof of the three-story gift shop caved in but no injuries were reported.
Fire officials said they expected widespread smoke and water damage throughout the building.
Two rare tapestries may have been seriously damaged.
The fire had been largely contained in the gift shop area, outside the main sanctuary of the Episcopal church, fire officials said. 
Later Tuesday, heavy gray smoke hung in the upper reaches of the cathedral, creating eerie shadows against the light pouring in through stained glass windows.
Firefighters sloshed through water up to 3 inches deep.
The high altar area appeared to have escaped damage. 
The cause of the blaze was under investigation. 
Up to 200 firefighters were called to the scene at about 7 a.m., an hour before the first Mass of the day, a week before Christmas.
Smoke poured from the gift shop, and scores of onlookers stood by. 
"There were clouds of black smoke 40 feet high.
The winds were blowing it all over the place," said Juan Cruz, a mechanic who saw the fire on his way to work.
On the church grounds a block from the blaze, about a dozen members of the Cathedral School's basketball team were led to safety by staff, said Cindy Arlia, the school's business manager.
Arriving parents were told to return home with their children. 
Among them was Margaret Hurwitz, who was with her 12-year-old son, Nicholas. 
"We were just crying all the way down here," she said. 
"You know, after the World Trade towers, you want something to be secure," Hurwitz said.
"This is where we came that day." 
Thousands of people visit the cathedral every day, and a half million a year, cathedral spokesman Jere Farrah said.
Two Masses are traditionally held on Christmas, each of which typically attracts as many as 5,000 people.
Besides church services, the cathedral also hosts tours and a breadth of concerts, including an ecumenical Winter Solstice celebration.
It is home to many priceless artifacts, according to Farrah, including a collection known as the Barberini tapestries, which date to the 17th and 18th centuries.
The tapestries, woven on the pope's official looms, depict the life of Christ.
Six of the tapestries were on display in the church, and officials said two of them may have been seriously damaged. 
The cathedral is on Manhattan's Upper West Side in the Morningside Heights neighborhood, which is also home to Columbia University.
The Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia says the church is the world's largest Gothic cathedral. 
The first stone was laid in 1892, but construction has never been completed, and work had continued until World War II.
When construction resumed in 1982 after a 41-year break, jobless local youths were trained in old-fashioned stonecutting methods. 
Cathedral organist Dorothy Papadakos said the organ was the city's fourth largest and dates to 1910. 
"We were going to do 'The Messiah' in two days," she said, "but I don't think it's going to happen."
The Associated Press contributed to this report.
The anthrax that killed five people appears to have been produced in the United States, the White House said Monday, but investigators still don't know who mailed it.
On Capitol Hill, a second attempt to sanitize a contaminated Senate office building failed. 
White House press secretary Ari Fleischer said the evidence on the anthrax sent to Sens. Tom Daschle, D-S.D., and Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., is increasingly "looking like it was a domestic source." 
President Bush emphasized that the case remains unsolved. 
"We're still looking," he said.
"We've all got different feelings about it.
We're gathering as much information as possible .
" The president promised that as soon as some conclusions are reached "we'll share it with the American people." 
At the State Department, the FBI was called to examine a white powder found in an envelope addressed to Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage.
The envelope moved through the regular U.S. mail system and officials assumed that it had been irradiated, said Lynn Cassel, a department spokeswoman. 
Cassel said the letter was addressed in "block letters," but she did not know if the envelope or the writing resembled that found on previous, anthrax-tainted letters. 
On Capitol Hill, a military physician told members of Daschle's staff at a briefing that he would recommend they take an anthrax vaccine, which is considered experimental, if Health and Human Services
Tommy Thompson approves its use.
Thompson was expected to make his decision this week. 
Technicians, meanwhile, ran into more problems trying to sanitize a Senate office building contaminated by lingering anthrax spores from the letter sent to Daschle in mid-October. 
Attempts to pump poisonous gas into the Hart Senate Office Building's ventilation system to kill any remaining spores failed early Monday, said Capitol Police spokesman Lt. Dan Nichols. 
He said a mechanical problem kept the gas from reaching the saturation point needed to kill the anthrax.
Technicians worked from 9 p.m Sunday to 3 a.m. Monday before they abandoned the effort. 
"The goal was to get 500 parts per million.
We did not achieve that goal," said Nichols.
He said he did not know what caused the problem, which did not show up the first time they used the gas on the building. 
Nichols said he was not aware of when another attempt would be made. 
The Hart building has remained closed since Oct. 17, two days after an anthrax-filled letter was received in Daschle's office.
The EPA reported Friday that traces of anthrax remained after the initial fumigation. 
In New Mexico, officials at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, who have been conducting research in the anthrax investigation, acknowledged that they received a sample of viable, or living, anthrax, despite telling area residents that its research was limited to inactive spores. 
Los Alamos, which has been analyzing the genetic content of the anthrax used in the attacks, thought it was receiving dead spores from Northern Arizona University.
But after the paperwork was filled out, the university discovered that the spores were alive and able to grow. 
An internal Los Alamos report indicated that its lab was not certified to handle live anthrax, prompting concern from a member of Congress, Rep. Edward Markey, D-Mass.
In fact, federal officials said Monday, the internal report was wrong and Los Alamos is certified to handle the live bacteria. 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has confirmed 18 cases of anthrax infection nationwide ?
11 cases of inhalation anthrax and seven through the skin ?
since the anthrax-by-mail attacks began in October.
Five people have died, all from inhalation anthrax.
Federal health officials said Tuesday they would offer anthrax vaccine and an extra 40 days of antibiotics to thousands of Capitol Hill and postal workers in case any anthrax still lurks in their lungs. 
The precautionary extra treatment is for people who already were prescribed two months of antibiotics because they may have been exposed during the anthrax attacks-by-mail. 
Health and Human Services
Secretary Tommy Thompson said workers will have to decide, in consultation with their doctors, whether to take extra antibiotics, to take the drugs along with the experimental vaccine ? or cease treatment and call a doctor promptly if they have any anthrax symptoms. 
The new precaution comes because some animal studies suggest that in rare cases, anthrax spores might linger in the body after standard 60-day antibiotic treatment and then erupt to sicken. 
The government has confirmed 18 cases of anthrax ?
11 of the often-deadly inhaled form and seven skin infections ?
since the bioterror attack began in October.
No new cases have been reported since a 94-year-old Connecticut woman died Nov. 21, the fifth death from the attacks. 
Anthrax is inhaled in a dormant spore form.
People get sick when those spores germinate deep in the lungs, letting the bacteria break out and multiply.
Antibiotics kill bacteria, not the spores. 
In some animal studies, 1 percent of the anthrax spores monkeys inhaled still lurked in their lungs 75 days later, and one monkey died three months after spore inhalation. 
So while 60 days of antibiotics protection should protect most people, federal scientists worry about the rare person who unknowingly has anthrax spores still lodged in the lungs, waiting to infect once antibiotics are stopped. 
Worse, hundreds of people, mostly postal workers, quit taking their antibiotics before 60 days passed, and no one yet knows the consequences. 
"Some of these people, especially those who may have been exposed to high levels of anthrax spores may wish to take additional precautions beyond completing the 60-day antibiotic regimens," Thompson said. 
Fewer than 3,000 people are thought to have been exposed to high levels, said Dr. D.A. Henderson, the government's top bioterrorism adviser.
Health officials couldn't estimate how many of them will want more treatment. 
Senate staffers who choose to be inoculated may get the first of three required shots as early as Wednesday, but the U.S. Postal Service has asked to wait a week so its employees can be educated about their options, Henderson said. 
Anthrax vaccine is proven to work only if given before someone inhales anthrax, not after.
So the Food and Drug Administration has given permission for people to be inoculated only if they are told the vaccinations are experimental. 
Anthrax vaccine has long been used by veterinarians, scientists and the military, and side effects are rare.
The main reactions are redness and swelling at the injection site; some swelling can be severe and last weeks but eventually it recedes. 
There is one other complication: Only one company makes anthrax vaccine, and its newly renovated factory has not passed FDA safety inspections.
FDA officials say they have tested some 10,000 doses of immediately available vaccine to ensure they're usable.
Senate lawmakers can do little to help Enron Corp.'s employees recover from the loss of their life savings after the energy trader filed for bankruptcy last week, but a couple have offered legislation to prevent such stunning losses from happening again. 
As senators listened to tales of the energy giant's employees, two Democratic senators proposed changing the law to limit to 20 percent the investment an employee can put into any one stock in their 401(k) accounts. 
"Frankly, we have been generous with our bill putting down a 20 percent cap," said Sen. Jon Corzine, D-N.J. 
Employees had as much as 67 percent of their stock invested in Enron, including matching contributions by the company.
Now that Enron's stock has gone from a high of $90 per share last year to less than a dollar per share this week, thousands of employees have been essentially ruined. 
In a Senate Commerce Committee hearing Tuesday, Robert Vigil, a Portland General Electric foreman, said his 401(k) went from a high of $163,000 to pennies.
Part of the reason was Enron's practice of purchasing its own stock to match funds contributed from employees.
"Every PGE employee has a story to tell about his or her losses," Vigil told the committee.
"All of us regarded the 401(k) plan as a way of investing our hard-earned wages for future security.
And we assumed that, in matching our contributions, our employer was giving us something of value.
It all now appears to have been a cruel illusion." 
Another complaint of employees is that they were locked out of selling their stock during a crucial period in October when Enron was trying to secure a deal to be bought out by Dynergy Corp.
After the deal went bad, employees said it was too late to get rid of their stock, even though Enron executives cashed out more than $1 billion in stock near its peak price.
Nearly 600 other critical operators received $100 million in bonuses last month. 
"We have been lied to and we have been cheated," said Janice Farmer, a retiree who had nearly $700,000 in Enron stock. 
In all, 4,500 out-of-work employees, countless investors and retirees have been burned by Enron's bankruptcy claim. 
"This is a tragedy for many, including the workers and investors who ... have been cheated out of billions of dollars," said Sen. Byron Dorgan, D-N.D., chairman of the Senate Commerce subcommittee on consumer affairs. 
"Some at the top of the pyramid got rich and many at the bottom lost everything.
It appears to me to be a combination of incompetence, greed, rampant speculation with investors' money, and perhaps some criminal behavior," Dorgan said. 
Sen. Barbara Boxer, D-Calif., a co-sponsor of the legislation, said she hoped some people "wind up in jail."
In the meantime, her bill has also proposed that employers limit to 90 days the amount of time an employee must hold a matching employer stock contribution in the employee's individual account plan, the idea being to allow workers to get rid of company stock if they don't want it.
Vigil said Enron required employees to hang on to company stock until age 50. 
The bill, which will have to wait until next year before any action can be taken, also calls for a reduction to 50 percent from 100 percent of the amount of tax deduction an employer can take on a matching contribution of company stock. 
In the meantime, Sen. Ron Wyden, D-Ore., said he would withhold his judgment on Enron executives' actions until the Securities and Exchange Commission investigates the bankruptcy, but he likened Enron's treatment of its workers to Titanic coal shovelers locked in the boiler room when the ship started sinking. 
"What is especially unsettling is that there is a law on the books today that was designed to prevent the sort of carnage that took place at Enron.
I wrote this law ... so that there would be new, stiffer requirements on accountants to search for fraud at publicly held companies like Enron and disclose it when they found it," Wyden said. 
C.E. Andrews of accounting firm Arthur Andersen said they are looking into possible mistakes or fraud in the Enron account. 
The Justice Department is also investigating Enron for possible criminal conduct.
The Labor Department, along with the SEC, is conducting its own civil investigation. 
Enron, which was the nation's seventh-biggest company in revenue and admired by Wall Street as a technological innovator, has acknowledged it overstated profits for four years. 
For the second time in less than a week, no Enron officials were present at a congressional hearing to defend the company's actions.
Chairman and CEO Kenneth Lay, a big campaign contributor, declined an invitation to testify but told the Senate panel he would attend a future hearing. 
The Associated Press contributed to this report .
As Democrats and Republicans battle out the remaining issues on an economic stimulus package, the chairman of the House tax-writing committee said he is holding out hope that a deal can be struck before House GOP leaders turn to Plan B.
On Tuesday, House Republicans were planning a vote on a second stimulus bill in an effort to pressure the Democratic Senate majority leader to agree to a compromise measure.
But House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Bill Thomas, R-Calif., who crafted the first bill that passed the House in October, said he hoped to come up with a deal with Senate leaders that would pre-empt the need to vote on the alternative bill.
He also said President Bush needs to be more involved in the process.
Bush, who has been working the phones since the debate began, met with Republican and Democratic congressional leaders Tuesday at the White House.
He will also go to Capitol Hill Wednesday to press his case. 
Back on Capitol Hill, House Speaker Dennis Hastert, R-Ill., said, "There is some room for negotiation," leaving open the possibility that negotiators could reach a deal on the original plan before resorting to the House GOP's alternative.
One key centrist, Democratic Sen. John Breaux of Louisiana, said House Republicans don't want "to do something they don't think can pass the Senate.
I would just hope there has to be a way we can reach an agreement." 
Thomas is trying to revive a $100 billion bill in stimulus provisions that forced Senate negotiations to break down over what percent of the bill should go to tax breaks versus aid to displaced workers.
About 70 percent of the House bill was directed to corporate and personal tax breaks and incentives. 
That bill passed on a narrow 216-214 vote but stalled in the Senate when Democrats refused to exclude additional health care assistance to unemployed workers.
Senate Republicans were also leery of the $100 billion cost, preferring a number closer to the $75 billion range proposed by Bush.
Senate Republicans, however, sought to include tax provisions for businesses opposed by Democrats.
Thomas said he is hopeful that a deal could be reached in the waning days of the congressional session but House Republicans, led by Majority Leader Dick Armey, R-Texas, are playing a tricky endgame in which they are preparing to pass a bill that would then enable the president to come up to pressure the Senate leadership to act.
A working draft of the House GOP bill ?
signed onto by Senate centrists ?
includes $33 billion for the unemployed and health care benefits for laid-off workers ?
an increase of more than $20 billion from the bill passed in October. 
It also includes an acceleration of the reduction in the marginal tax of 27 percent to 25 percent, currently slated to be reduced in 2005; and a repeal of the alternative minimum tax payment.
The repeal is not the retroactive repeal first sought by House Republicans.
Senate centrists said they agree to most of the House GOP provisions, though Senate Democrats had wanted a one-year entitlement provision, expanding eligibility for Medicaid, while Republicans wanted a 65 percent COBRA tax credit for health insurance, which will likely be the end result.
Centrists were trying to keep the AMT out of the package, but it is still being negotiated. 
Senate Republicans were said to be on board with the above provisions with the exception of Sen. Lincoln Chafee, R-R.I.
The effort Monday was to drum up more support among Democrats.
Democratic Sens. John Breaux of Louisiana, Ben Nelson of Nebraska and Zell Miller of Georgia were said to support the bill.
While the president is willing to deal on either of the bills, White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said Monday the president thinks passage of a second bill would add more pressure on the Senate leaders.
"Well, I think there's a real possibility it might help.
It seems to be a rather centrist proposal and a positive idea, something that the president supports," Fleischer said. 
Fleischer said Tuesday the president he hoped Congress would still be able to reach an agreement even if the Senate rejects the second House bill.
"The president does not want to give up.
The president thinks it's too important to the unemployed and too important to the strength of the economy that he will go the extra mile this week to get an agreement." 
Fox News'
Julie Asher and Jim Mills contributed to this report.
Retail sales at discount, chain and department stores fell sharply during the first two weeks of December as reluctant consumers put off holiday purchases until closer to next week's Christmas holiday, Instinet Research said in its weekly report Tuesday. 
The Redbook Retail Sales Average tumbled 4.6 percent in the two weeks ended Dec. 15 compared with the same period in November. 
Sales in the first two weeks of December were off 1.1 percent compared with the same period a year ago. 
Still, many retailers' results were close to plan in the latest week, and "sales growth is expected to be the strongest in the next two weeks as consumers continue to delay purchases close to Christmas," the report said. 
Sales of winter clothing improved as a wave of cold weather swept across parts of the country.
Demand was also solid for consumer electronics, like DVD players, the Sony Playstation and the Microsoft Xbox.
Videos and toys also sold well. 
Redbook said the two biggest weeks in December for retailers are those immediately before and after Christmas. "
These weeks could determine the entire month's performance, which makes current readings somewhat provisional," the report said. 
The Redbook Retail Sales Average is a sales-weighted average of annual growth in same-store sales at discount, department and chain stores that report their results on a weekly basis. 
The average is compiled from a sample of general merchandise retailers representing about 9,000 stores.
Same-store sales measure revenues at stores open at least a year. 
The Redbook Average is released weekly by Instinet Research, a division of Instinet, a Reuters-owned electronic brokerage.
Britain is willing to lead an international peacekeeping force in Afghanistan and the first troops could be on the ground shortly, Prime Minister Tony Blair said Monday. 
Addressing parliament, Blair said a number of details remain to be resolved, but several nations had indicated they were willing to contribute troops, including Canada, Australia, Argentina, Jordan and New Zealand. 
London hopes the United Nations Security Council will approve the deployment of the force by the end of the week, and Britain expects to contribute up to 1,500 troops, Blair said. 
Earlier Monday, a government spokesman said the first international peacekeeping troops could be in Afghanistan by the end of the week.
The lead elements of a stabilization force were expected to be in place by Saturday, when an interim administration is scheduled to take power in Afghanistan. 
"I don't think anyone is expecting the totality of any force to have their boots on the ground by that point.
That is not to say there may not be forces in Kabul by then," the unidentified spokesman told the Press Association. 
Meanwhile, the leader of the interim Afghan administration, Hamid Karzai, arrived in London for talks with the British Foreign Office's two senior Afghan experts. 
Karzai was to meet with Robert Cooper and Stephen Evans, Britain's former special envoy in Kabul, during a brief stopover at Heathrow Airport. 
The new leader was on his way to Rome to meet with the exiled Afghan king, Zahir Shah. 
More news on the composition of the stabilization force is expected Tuesday when a British military reconnaissance team in Kabul, led by Maj.
Gen. John McColl, was to report back to London after completing negotiations with key figures in the new administration.
Solectron Corp., the world's largest contract electronics manufacturer, Tuesday reported a fiscal first-quarter loss, on sharp declines in its personal computer and telecommunications operations. 
The Milpitas, California-based company, which has cut 25,000 jobs worldwide in the past year to combat the economic downturn, also said it plans to raise about $1.5 billion in new debt, and established a $500 million credit facility. 
Shares of Solectron tumbled $2.61, or nearly 18 percent, to $12.20 in morning trade on the New York Stock Exchange. 
Contract manufacturers, including Solectron and rival Flextronics International Ltd., have been suffering along with their customers from a slump in demand for electronics products over the past year. 
In the first quarter that ended Nov. 30, Solectron lost $52.5 million, or 8 cents a share, on sales of $3.15 billion.
A year ago, the company earned $190.6 million, or 29 cents a share, on sales of $5.70 billion. 
Excluding charges for acquisitions, restructuring, and asset impairment, the company said it broke even for the first quarter.
On a cash basis, Solectron said it earned 5 cents a share, in line with the consensus analyst estimate as measured by research firm Thomson Financial/First Call. 
Solectron said sales could drop further in the second quarter, to a range of $2.7 billion to $3.2 billion.
Before one-time items, the company forecast breaking even or losing as much as 3 cents a share in the second quarter. 
On a cash basis, the company said it expects earnings of between 1 cent and 4 cents a share. 
Analysts had expected earnings ranging between four cents and 10 cents per share for the period, with a mean of seven cents. 
The company, which acquired Montreal-based C-MAC Industries Inc. for about $2.3 billion, also said it expects to take between $250 million and $350 million in restructuring and impairment charges in the second quarter. 
"We continue taking actions to align our cost-structure with current revenue levels," Solectron Chief Executive Koichi Nichimura said.
"These actions, which include reducing employment levels and production capacity, are painful but necessary to keep the company healthy." 
Solectron's shares closed at $14.81 on the New York Stock Exchange on Monday.
They have fallen from a high of $41.95 on January 19. 
The company said it would offer $1 billion in adjustable conversion-rate equity security units, or ACES, and at least $500 million of unsecured fixed-rate debt. 
The ACES consist of a contract to buy a variable number of Solectron common shares and a five-year note to be issued by Solectron.
Under the contract, the company will issue common stock in three years. 
Early Monday, Moody's Investors Service cut its ratings on Solectron's long-term senior unsecured debt to junk, or below investment grade, status.
The rating change, Moody's said, is due to the company's weak operating performance, among other reasons. 
The ACES offering was given a junk rating by international rating agency Fitch. 
The company also said it had received a commitment for $500 million of revolving credit facilities and expects to close on it during the first quarter of calendar 2002. 
Chief Financial Officer Kiran Patel said the debt and credit plans formed part of "a comprehensive plan that meets our near-term debt obligations and strengthens our capital structure."
: DON'T LET WALKER CLEAN UP By JOHN LEHMANN December 19, 2001 -- Former President George H.W. Bush has come up with his own punishment for American Taliban rat John Walker: parade him around the nation to show off his dirty face and filthy hair. 
Labeling the turncoat "despicable," Bush said he was so offended he thought up a "unique penalty." 
"Make him leave his hair the way it is, and his face as dirty as it is, and let him go wandering around this country, see what kind of sympathy he would get," Bush told ABC's "Good Morning America" in an interview to air today and tomorrow. 
Former First Lady Barbara Bush said that her son, President George W. Bush, was not expressing sympathy for Walker when he called him a "poor fellow." 
"I think the president meant that he's obviously demented," she said, adding that Walker had helped "the enemy." 
Walker's lawyer, James Brosnahan, said yesterday his parents were disappointed that the government had refused to pass on a letter they sent to their son.
By GEOFF SPENCER and TRACY CONNOR December 18, 2001 -- Hounded out of their caves and captured on the run, Osama bin Laden's vaunted al Qaeda fighters broke down in tears yesterday and begged not to be turned over to the Americans. 
As Afghan tribal militiamen and U.S. Special Forces hunted the rest of the terror chief's decimated army, crying captives were led down snowcapped mountains near Tora Bora on mules. 
Once-swaggering mercenaries - their hands tied behind their backs with red nylon rope - covered their faces or stared blankly ahead as they limped past a mosque in one village. 
Nine Afghan and nine Arab prisoners were pushed into a dusty yard and paraded past reporters, but were not allowed to speak.
Several appeared to be injured, and one had his head wrapped in bandages. 
"When they were fighting us, they were very proud men," said 23-year-old villager Manoghul.
"Now they are weak.
They cannot even look at us." 
Another 13 al Qaeda fighters were being held in the mountains by tribal commander Haji Zahir, and they pleaded with their captors not to turn them over to U.S. forces. 
Khudaifa - a 17-year-old from Kuwait who joined al Qaeda with his father, who was then killed by a U.S. bomb - feared he wouldn't live long enough to become an American prisoner. 
"I haven't had a drink for two days," he said.
"If you don't give me water, I will die." 
U.S. officials had not yet determined if those seized over the last two days included any high-ranking members of bin Laden's force, and they said it's possible some had bribed their way to freedom. 
Pakistan is holding close to 100 al Qaeda fighters seized at the border, but nearly all the prisoners were in the custody of American-backed Afghan tribal forces. 
With the United States anxious to interrogate the captives, however, that could soon change. 
American officials are trying to arrange for some 300 al Qaeda members to be transferred to U.S. custody - probably at Camp Rhino, near Kandahar, where a detention center is under construction. 
"There'll be more detainees coming," the Pentagon's spokesman, Rear Adm. John Stufflebeem, said. 
At least five captives have been taken aboard the USS Peleliu, a Navy helicopter assault ship, officials said. 
The identities of only two are known: David Hicks, a 26-year-old Australian captured fighting alongside the Taliban, and John Walker, a 20-year- old American found with Taliban forces last month. 
Walker, who is classified as a battlefield detainee but could face charges of treason, has been interrogated. 
"He has been questioned, properly questioned, by the U.S. government," President Bush said, adding that a decision on whether Walker will be charged has not been made.
The ad, for Japanese TV, shows a Russian cosmonaut grabbing a floating bottle of a sports drink called "Pocari Sweat" and gulping it down while gazing at Earth from the International Space Station. 
The ad cost about $786,000 to make, said an official at Japan's Dentsu Inc, the world's fourth largest ad agency. 
The National Space Agency of Japan also chipped in about $80,000 for the project, the Dentsu official said. 
The International Space Station program is a partnership between NASA and space agencies in Russia, Canada, Europe and Japan. 
The Russians also have plans to put civilians in space for a price, with the first likely candidate South African Internet millionaire, Mark Shuttleworth.
This would be a perfect morning to wake up to the echoes, to believe in the golden-domed notions of a sanctuary within the ethical wasteland so thinly disguised as major college sports.
We have Colorado football players answering questions about an alleged gang rape, and the Massachusetts basketball team playing in a casino, and a Towson ballplayer divorcing a coach he said was doing his Brian Dennehy best to mimic Bob Knight.
We could use the South Bend of Knute and Leahy and Ara, the Fighting Irish of Rice (as in Grantland and Tony), Reagan (as in Ronald) and Rudy (as in Rudy ).
We could use all the myths of Notre Dame right about now, if only George O'Leary didn't prove to be a myth himself.
"Notre Shame," said Dusty Zeigler, the New York Giants center and a former Fighting Irish captain among those fighting mad that athletic director Kevin White let the university get blindsided by a coach who had claimed everything on his r?sum?
but a role in toppling the Berlin Wall.
"I think (White) should be fired," Zeigler said.
"Somebody should be responsible, and he's the man hiring and firing coaches.
Everyone's embarrassed and ashamed.
Now we're just bland, an average Joe, and we can't proclaim Notre Dame as an elite school anymore.
Our enthusiasm has been bled dry.
"
The hemorrhaging started long before O'Leary confessed to the not-so-venial sin of humiliating Notre Dame with tales of a master's degree never earned and a few touchdowns never scored.
Remember, the school emerged from the Gerry Faust years to make its Faustian deal with NBC.
There was a nasty little booster scandal, probation and Bob Davie testifying about Lou Holtz's sanity in court.
There was White granting Davie a five-year extension, threatening Davie's job three games into that extension, firing Davie, then hiring O'Leary despite knowing the Georgia Tech coach had given one player an improper loan and another player an improper lesson.
After Dustin Vaitekunas missed a practice block last year, O'Leary had four defensive linemen charge him and hit him at full speed, pounding the backup tackle into submission (he quit and transferred) and compelling his mother to demand that O'Leary be arrested for assault (the coach wasn't disciplined).
"I don't think he's the type of person you want running your team," Vaitekunas said last Monday.
Kevin White agreed with him four days too late.
"I knew sooner or later his true colors would come out," Vaitekunas said Sunday.
Notre Dame has been exposed as just another Touchdown Tech, another school defined by an impetuous athletic director and blinded by big scoreboard lights.
Davie had graduated 100% of his players.
Way back when, the devout Faust wasn't offered a contract renewal even though he'd never met a candle he wouldn't light.
It's a shame, too, since a survey of the college landscape leaves one wishing Notre Dame was indeed better than its Saturday afternoons in the sun.
Bowl-bound Colorado players already are calling the alleged rape an "unwanted distraction," this after Oregon's Mike Bellotti likened the BCS to cancer.
UMass lost its 1996 Final Four season to scandal and still saw nothing wrong with ringing up Central Connecticut State while the Mohegan Sun slots were raging next door.
Towson saw nothing wrong with its basketball coach's conduct after Tamir Goodman an Orthodox Jew who drew national attention when Maryland recruited him claimed Michael Hunt kicked a stool at him and held a chair above his head in a threatening manner.
"Tamir didn't attend Maryland because he didn't like the way Gary Williams talked to his mother when discussing his refusal to play on the Sabbath," said Goodman's father, Karl.
"Tamir has standards.
If a coach crosses that moral line, he won't play for him."
Yes, college sports has far bigger issues than the BCS, enough to inspire one to contact that great Congressional crusader, Tom Osborne, or to dream of a South Bend sanctuary that doesn't exist.
So Notre Dame wants to rise above the field?
Here's how they can: Hire a winning coach short on style and long on substance.
Hire someone who runs against the grain of college football's disgraceful record of unequal sideline opportunity.
Hire Ty Willingham of Stanford, and then these tired Irish eyes will see Notre Dame as better than the rest.
Ian O'Connor also writes for The (Westchester County, N.Y.)
Journal News.
Belgian Foreign Minister Louis Michel announced Friday that the 15 European Union members would contribute up to 4,000 European troops to the security force.
London hopes the U.N. Security Council will approve the deployment of the force by the end of the week and Britain expects to contribute up to 1,500 troops, Blair said.
The prime minister said a number of details remain to be resolved, but several other nations had indicated they were willing to contribute troops including Argentina, Australia, Canada, the Czech Republic, Jordan, Malaysia, New Zealand and Turkey.
After initially putting thousands of British troops on standby to go to Afghanistan without any go-ahead to deploy, Blair hesitated for more than a week over taking leadership of the multinational force.
Some British officials are concerned about being sucked into a political quagmire, and the risk of Afghan factions turning against an international force.
"The fact is we are the nation best placed to give that leadership, which is why we have been asked to do it," Blair told the House of Commons.
But Iain Duncan Smith, leader of the opposition Conservative Party, said he had "deep misgivings" about British involvement in any peacekeeping mission and called for any troop deployment to stipulate an exit strategy and a time limit.
Diplomats at the United Nations said Britain envisions leading the multinational force in a first phase that would last months rather than weeks or days and then handing over the lead position, preferably to a Muslim nation.
The lead elements of the force are expected to be in place by Saturday, when an interim administration led by Hamid Karzai will be installed.
Karzai arrived in London for talks with the British Foreign Office's two senior Afghan experts, Robert Cooper and Stephen Evans, Britain's former special envoy in Kabul.
Karzai was making a brief stopover at London's Heathrow Airport on his way to Rome to meet with the exiled Afghan king, Zahir Shah.
Blair said details of the force must await the outcome of meeting in Kabul between a British military reconnaissance team led by Maj.
Gen. John McColl and key figures in the new administration.
The U.N.-brokered agreement signed by four Afghan factions on Dec. 5 established an interim administration to govern for six months and called for a multinational security force in Kabul initially and possibly elsewhere later on.
Diplomats said members of the Security Council, which must authorize the force, were still debating how broad or specific the mandate should be.
The British have been trying to work out how the force will operate, and how it will interact with the U.S.-led force already on the ground fighting remnants of the Taliban and hunting for Osama bin Laden, the lead suspect in the Sept. 11 U.S. terrorist attacks.
They also want Afghan approval for its deployment.
Afghanistan's post-Taliban government informed the Security Council Friday that it agreed to the deployment of the multinational force but under provisions that do not explicitly authorize its use of military force.
Many council members want the force to be able to take military action if threatened, which could pose problems in adopting a resolution.
Blair said the rules of engagement for British troops in Afghanistan were yet to be finalized but pledged the force would be "properly protected at all times".
He said the peacekeeping force would play a crucial role in Afghanistan's transition phase following a "brilliant victory" over the ousted Taliban regime.
"That is a welcome liberation
but we know that is only the start of enabling Afghanistan to cease being a failed state and become a responsible partner in the region," he said.
Copyright 2001
The Associated Press.
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
Biotech leader Amgen agreed Monday to buy Immunex for $16 billion in cash and stock, a record deal for the industry that could force other biotechs to combine or else.
By buying the third-biggest biotech firm, Amgen adds a profitable arthritis drug to its already impressive lineup, making it a bigger threat to other biotechs and to traditional drug firms with larger, but aging, product lines.
"We're looking at a monster biotech company," says Paul Abel, portfolio manager of the Kinetics Medical fund.
Antitrust issues could be a concern because the two would have a dominant share of drugs that boost white blood cells.
But Immunex plans to divest its drug, Leukine, Amgen spokeswoman Rebecca Hamm says.
MedImmune agreed Dec. 3 to acquire Aviron for $1.3 billion, to obtain its influenza treatment.
Cephalon also said on Dec. 3 it was paying $450 million for France's Group Lafon, which has a late-stage product thought to treat narcolepsy.
Millennium Pharmaceuticals agreed Dec. 6 to buy Cor Therapeutics for $2 billion.
This merger is the textbook example of what investors should expect, analysts say.
Money-losing Millennium gets access to actual products being sold, including Cor's treatment for acute coronary syndrome.
"Having a drug in your hand is how you make your business model understandable," says Tom Dietz, analyst at Pacific Growth.
The list of biotech buyout candidates is a long one.
But Stefan Loren of Legg Mason says likely targets include Vertex Pharmaceuticals, Biogen and Gilead Sciences.
Vertex is researching treatments for viral diseases.
Biogen sells a product that treats multiple sclerosis.
Gilead Sciences is researching treatments for infectious diseases.
So far, traditional drug firms have shown little interest in buying biotechs.
They are reluctant to use their shares to buy richly valued biotechs and so prefer joint ventures, Loren says.
But biotechs are still ripe to be bought by peers. "
A lot of biotech companies are one-hit wonders," Loren says.
That means they have to buy new products to grow, he says.
Motorola is cutting another 9,400 jobs, or more than 8% of its work force, in a push to return to profitability in 2002.
The cell phone and semiconductor maker has now shrunk its work force by 32% 42,900 jobs through layoffs and 5,500 through sales of businesses since it stood at 150,000 worldwide in August 2000.
The long-troubled tech giant said Tuesday it remains on track to achieve the fourth-quarter results it forecast two months ago, but said its loss will be greater than expected in the first quarter of next year.
The latest round of job cuts, to be made over the course of the next year, include 4,000 from its semiconductor operations, 1,300 from its equipment manufacturing businesses and another 4,100 distributed companywide.
Company spokesman Scott Wyman said they will take place across all Motorola's businesses and most geographic regions where it operates, including its headquarters in Schaumburg, Ill.
He declined to be more specific.
Motorola, the world's No. 2 cell phone manufacturer and a leading computer chip maker, disclosed the cuts while confirming it is headed toward a fourth straight quarter in the red in the current three-month period, with operating losses about the same as estimated in October.
It warned it now anticipates a loss of 11 to 14 cents a share in the first quarter.
A consensus of analysts surveyed by Thomson Financial/First Call had pegged that loss at 5 cents.
Christopher Galvin, chairman and chief executive officer, said he regretted the continuing layoffs but sees them as necessary for a "leaner, more flexible and more profitable company" in an unpredictable global environment.
He said the current "extraordinary" technology cycle "when coupled with the overall softening of the global economy, dictates that the company must continue to improve its overall efficiency and competitiveness in order to return to profitability."
Galvin said he was pleased with the progress Motorola is making in its long-slumping cell phone business but was forced to remain conservative going into 2002.
The company expects to be profitable for the full year next year, he said.
Before the announcement, Motorola's shares closed up 34 cents Wednesday at $16.61 on the New York Stock Exchange.
In extended trading, however, shares fell 21 cents.
Copyright 2001
The Associated Press.
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
S.C. Lou Holtz won't come out and say he's not interested in returning to Notre Dame, but his South Carolina players are certain the 64-year-old coach will stay with them.
Holtz gathered his team around him before Outback Bowl workouts Tuesday and told them he was a Gamecock and wanted to build a championship team at South Carolina, members of the team said.
In the mind of defensive lineman John Stamper, that closed any chance Holtz might have returned to his old school.
"Coach Holtz made a commitment to us and to the university," Stamper said.
"When he says something, you can take that to the bank."
"He told us that he's a Gamecock right now," tailback-wide receiver Ryan Brewer said.
"He believes he can win a championship here and we haven't done that yet."
Holtz's future suddenly came into play Saturday when Notre Dame contacted him in what the coach said was an advisory role in the Fighting Irish's coaching search.
"The call strictly was Notre Dame asking for advice," Holtz said after the call was first reported Monday in The South Bend (Ind.) Tribune .
Kerry Tharp, South Carolina's spokesman, said Holtz was not in Notre Dame's mix.
Tharp said Notre Dame officials have not asked for permission to speak with Holtz and nothing changed Tuesday.
The one thing missing so far is a flat-out statement from Holtz that he won't return to the school he led to the 1988 national championship and worked at for 11 high-profile seasons.
But none of that worries the Gamecocks, who say their coach has always played it straight with them and is doing so now.
Holtz told them he wanted to bring a title to the Gamecocks and that the job here was not complete, center Larrell Johnson said.
"When he said that, it eliminated the question in my mind about him going back to Notre Dame," Johnson said.
The Notre Dame job came open when George O'Leary resigned last week after just five days on the job, admitting he lied on his resume about academic and athletic achievements.
The former Georgia Tech coach had been hired Dec. 9 to replace the fired Bob Davie.
Copyright 2001
The Associated Press.
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
Charles Prestwood, an Enron retiree whose $1.3 million in savings vanished with the energy firm's collapse, described his experience this way: "It was rags to riches and back to rags."
Prestwood was one of five who gave emotional testimony before a Senate committee Tuesday about how they suffered in Enron's collapse.
Four weren't able to sell any stock during the crucial four-week period after the Securities and Exchange Commission announced a probe into Enron, sending its stock from $25 to less than $5.
Enron filed for bankruptcy protection Dec. 2.
Tuesday, its shares closed at 50 cents.
Janice Farmer retired last year from Enron with nearly $700,000 worth of stock.
When she tried to sell on Oct. 22, she was told she could not because Enron had just changed retirement plan administrators.
"I can't begin to tell you how devastating that was," Farmer said.
"Enron made all its employees responsible for their own retirement.
At the most critical time, they denied us access to our own money."
Sen. Bill Nelson, D-Fla., said the lockdown coming just after the SEC news probably was no coincidence.
"We had no choice but to ride the stock into the ground," said Robert Vigil, 47, from Enron's Portland (Ore.)
General Electric unit.
"Our plan prohibited anyone under the age of 50 from selling stock."
The Senate hearing on the Enron collapse, like last week's House hearing, focused on the discrepancy between Enron's officers, who sold more than $1 billion in stock over the last three years, and rank-and-file workers, who were constantly encouraged to plow their savings into Enron stock.
Outrage about the plight of those employees and disbelief about how Enron could dupe its auditors is already fueling calls for action on Capitol Hill.
Sen. Barbara Boxer, D-Calif., said Enron might have broken the law by effectively forcing employees to hold stock during a period when many wanted to sell.
Sen. Ron Wyden, D-Ore., said Enron and its auditor, Andersen Worldwide, might have violated the Financial Fraud Detection and Disclosure Act.
Enron CEO Kenneth Lay declined to appear for the second time in a week, promising to show up at the next Senate committee hearing, scheduled Feb. 4.
In his absence, Senators fired questions at C.E. Andrews, a managing partner at Andersen who oversaw the Enron audit.
Wyden demanded to know whether any of Enron's unusual off-the-books arrangements raised suspicions at the accounting firm.
Andrews said that the firm passed judgment on the off-the-books arrangements in strict accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, but admitted the firm made an error in judgment in one case.
Enron restated its numbers to show it earned $586 million less than it reported the last three years.
Andersen says it's responsible for 20% of that amount.
N.J.
The New York Giants kept their faint playoff hopes alive Saturday with a drive reminiscent of last season's run to the Super Bowl.
Kerry Collins threw a 4-yard touchdown pass to Amani Toomer with 25 seconds to play and the Giants snapped a three-game losing streak with a 17-13 victory over the Arizona Cardinals.
The comeback was out of character for the Giants , who have blown four fourth-quarter leads this season.
The Cardinals came close to making it five after taking a 13-10 lead on Tywan Mitchell's leaping 24-yard touchdown catch on a fourth-down pass from Jake Plummer with 4:04 to play.
"I felt there has been a lot of games over the last couple of weeks where we had opportunities, our offense had opportunities, and I think we just got fed up," Toomer said.
"It was our turn to make plays to win the game."
Toomer, Collins, Ike Hilliard and Tiki Barber all contributed on the 11-play, 70-yard drive that still left the Giants on the outside of the playoff picture.
They need to win their final three games and get help.
"When they scored, if ever there was a chance for a team to say it can't happen, that was it," Giants coach Jim Fassel said.
"For us to hang in there and win the game says a lot."
Collins also threw a 26-yard touchdown pass to Ron Dixon, and Morten Andersen kicked a 39-yard field goal in the game that featured a lot of inept play.
The most comical play came from Cardinals kicker Bill Gramatica, who hyperextended his right knee jumping to celebrate a 42-yard field goal in the first quarter.
He added a 23-yarder in the second quarter but wasn't able to handle the kickoffs.
Starting safety Pat Tillman had to do that and that allowed the Giants to take over at their 30 after Mitchell's spectacular catch gave Arizona the lead.
"When they got the touchdown, it was like, 'You've got to be kidding me,"' said Collins, who was 6-of-9 for 56 yards on the final drive and finished 14-of-32 for 147 yards.
"We all hung in there and stayed positive and did what we had to do."
Collins started the game-winning drive with a 14-yard pass to Hilliard.
After a 14-yard run by Barber, Collins kept the drive alive with a 9-yard, third-down pass to Hilliard.
A 14-yard pass to Toomer got the ball to the Cardinals' 15 and Barber had an 11-yard catch on third down to give New York a first-and-goal at the 4.
Toomer, who was nearly benched after dropping three passes earlier in the game, scored two plays later on a fade pattern to the right corner of the end zone.
Cardinals cornerback Renaldo Hill slipped and fell on the play.
"I'm sickened, I'm extremely sick for those players in there," Cardinals coach Dave McGinnis said.
"They put everything they had out there and we didn't get it done."
Arizona linebacker Ronald McKinnon said the blame should fall on the defense.
"We asked the offense to score and they score, and we didn't do it," McKinnon said.
The Cardinals squandered a chance to take the lead late in the second quarter when Trey Junkin launched a snap 5 yards over the head of holder Scott Player on a 23-yard field goal attempt.
Andersen added his 39-yard field goal early in the fourth quarter. 
Notes:
The Giants won the opening toss and elected to take the wind, giving the Cardinals the ball both halves. ...
The Cardinals held the ball for 36:55.
New York's 23:05 was its lowest possession time this season. ...
Giants WR Joe Jurevicius missed his second straight game with a hamstring injury. ...
There was a moment of silence before the kickoff for former Giants general manager George Young, who died last Sunday. ...
Giants LB Jessie Armstead had 13 tackles and three assists.
Giants DE Michael Strahan had half a sack, giving him 17 for the season, five shy of Mark Gastineau's league record. ...
David Boston led the Cardinals with eight catches for 84 yards, ending a five-game streak in which New York had allowed an opposing player to record 100-yards receiving.
Copyright 2001
The Associated Press.
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
What is the National Guard?
The National Guard is a state and federal military force with Army and Air Force troops in all 50 states and the District of Columbia, Guam, the Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico.
There are about 350,000 Army Guard soldiers in the United States and 108,000 Air Guard troops.
By comparison, the active-duty Army has 480,000 soldiers and the Air Force has 357,000 airmen.
The majority of Guard troops are part-timers who drill one weekend a month and two weeks each year.
In its state role, the Guard falls under the command of each state's governor in peacetime and can be called up to respond to natural disasters and other emergencies.
The National Guard also has a federal role serving as a backup to the Army and Air Force.
A large percentage of combat support jobs in the Army and Air Force are assigned to the National Guard, including military police, aerial refuelers, water purification units and numerous other specialists.
The Guard also has combat units that include infantry, tank units and fighter jets.
The Army National Guard is separate from the U.S. Army Reserves, which is the active-duty Army's backup force and reports directly to the Army.
The Army Reserves has about 208,000 soldiers.
The National Guard is the oldest component of the armed forces.
The National Guard traces its roots to state militias set up 365 years ago during the colonial period.
The Guard has fought in every major war this century.
The National Guard made up 40% of American combat divisions in France and National Guard units were among the first to deploy overseas during World War II.
Guard troops in the Persian Gulf War performed a variety of missions, from supporting combat soldiers to flying fighter jets.
In many hundreds of communities across the United States, the National Guard is the most visible U.S. military presence.
There are National Guard armories in virtually every congressional district in the United States and in some towns three and four generations have served in the Guard.
There is a vast difference between the Army Guard and the Air Guard.
For most of this century the Army Guard has had a rocky relationship with the active-duty Army.
The two forces have competed for federal funding and troops.
In the past 5 years, the Army and National Guard have attempted to forge a much closer relationship.
The Air National Guard has cultivated a close relationship with the active-duty Air Force and is often seen by Air Force leaders as an equal player.
Air Guard fighter units are often filled with former Air Force pilots and mechanics and sometimes have more experience than their Air Force counterparts.
After a 19-year hiatus, the Tangerine Bowl is back. 
North Carolina State of the Atlantic Coast Conference and Pittsburgh of the Big East were chosen to participate in a bowl game that once was a fixture in Central Florida. 
Founded in 1946, the Tangerine Bowl was held in Orlando for 37 years before giving way to the Citrus Bowl.
Boston College and Auburn played in the last Tangerine Bowl in 1982. 
its 11-year history. since it staged a remarkable rally of its own this season. 
The Panthers dropped to 1-5 following a 45-7 loss at Boston College on Oct. 20 and coach Walt Harris' job appeared to be in jeopardy.
But Pittsburgh responded by winning its final five games, including a 38-7 rout of bowl-bound Virginia Tech on Nov. 3. 
Pittsburgh clinched its second straight bowl appearance with a 24-6 victory over Alabama-Birmingham on Dec. 1.
The Panthers are making back-to-back bowl appearances for the first time since the Dan Marino days in the early 1980s. 
The turnaround can be attributed to an improved defense.
During the winning streak, the Panthers are allowing an average of just over seven points per game.
They gave up 42 and 45 points in back-back losses to Syracuse and Boston College. 
Quarterback David Priestley also has picked up his game, throwing 13 touchdown passes in the last five contests.
He had only four TD tosses in his first five outings, missing one game with an injury. 
Pittsburgh posted its best finish since going 6-0-1 in its final seven games in 1983. 
Antonio Bryant endured an injury-plagued year and caught only 42 passes for 659 yards after leading the nation in receiving yards last season (130.0 ypg) and earning All-America honors.
But he still tops the Panthers with nine touchdown passes. 
The highlight of North Carolina State's season was a 34-28 victory at Florida State in November as the Wolfpack became the first ACC team to win at Doak-Campbell Stadium. 
A week later, North Carolina State nearly upset ACC champion Maryland before falling, 23-19, on a last-minute touchdown. 
The Wolfpack also had a strong finish, winning four of their last five to earn a bowl invitation after splitting their first six games. 
Philip Rivers enjoyed a steady, if not spectacular, season for North Carolina State, passing for 2,586 yards with 16 touchdowns and seven interceptions. 
Clemson also was considered for this game before Wolfpack coach Chuck Amato interrupted a recruiting trip to visit Florida and plead his team's case.
North Carolina State and Pittsburgh also met in the 1978 Tangerine Bowl, with the Wolfpack posting a 30-17 victory.
Tribal sources said four tribesmen and eight soldiers were killed, but security officials in Marib province, 100 miles east of the capital, San'a, said the five suspects apparently were able to hide or escape the barrage and special troops who moved in for a search.
Security officials would not comment on casualties.
The tribal sources also said 22 people were wounded, some of them soldiers, and that several small homes used by tribesmen to fire on the government troops were destroyed in the exchange.
After two hours of bombardment against the Abida tribe in the morning, special forces successfully entered the al-Halsun region some of them dropped from helicopters but did not find the suspects, the security officials in Marib said.
However, government forces arrested a number of tribesmen suspected of hiding the wanted men, an Interior Ministry official said.
He did not say how many.
All the officials and tribal sources spoke on condition of anonymity.
In Washington, Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz said the United States has been "urging the Yemenis to do more" about suspected al-Qaeda members in the country.
But he said he had no information on the special forces' operation.
The administration has long been concerned about "pockets where we believe al-Qaeda people have sheltered and may be there now" in Yemen, particularly along the remote Saudi border.
The Yemeni Interior Ministry official said special forces were conducting a wide search operation in Marib and adjacent Shabwa provinces, and that security has also been tightened in the provinces of Hadramout, Abyan, and Lahj, three strongholds of Islamic militants in eastern Yemen.
Bin Laden, whose father was born in the Hadramout region, is the prime suspect in the Sept. 11 terror attacks.
His al-Qaeda network is believed to exist in dozens of countries.
The United States believes al-Qaeda was also behind the October 2000 attack on the destroyer USS Cole in Yemen's southern port of Aden, which killed 17 American sailors.
Although no U.S. operatives participated in Tuesday's operation, Yemeni authorities are apprising American officials of the ongoing search for the suspects, another Interior Ministry official said, also on condition of anonymity.
The special forces unit was the first to graduate from a U.S.-funded program to train and equip Yemen's security forces.
Tuesday's battle marked the first time since Sept. 11 that door-to-door search operations in Yemen have been conducted with military support and erupted into fighting.
It was also is the first time Yemen has said publicly it is pursuing members of al-Qaeda in the country.
Sources in the Marib region familiar with the special forces' operation said the bombardment came after the Abida tribe refused in two days of negotiations to hand over at least five men suspected of belonging to al-Qaeda.
Those sources said one of the men was among three names of suspected al-Qaeda operatives in Yemen that U.S. officials gave Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh during his visit last month to Washington.
At least one of the men being sought was a non-Yemeni Arab who previously was in Afghanistan, they said.
The Abida tribe, which numbers some 5,000, is the largest in Marib province, which has earned a reputation for lawlessness.
Since 1990, about 100 foreigners have been kidnapped in Marib, usually used as bargaining chips with the government to press for aid and better living conditions.
Copyright 2001
The Associated Press.
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
Back in September, Fresno State had loftier goals than playing in the Silicon Valley Bowl.
But that is where the No. 21 Bulldogs will be spending New Year's Eve for the second straight year. 
Fresno State opened the season with wins over Colorado, Oregon State and Wisconsin and had visions of a lucrative date in the Bowl Championship Series.
The Bulldogs soon came back to earth due to a porous defense, allowing a combined 73 points in back-to-back losses to Boise State and Hawaii. 
Behind quarterback David Carr, Fresno State regained its form and won its last five games by a combined score of 261-93. 
A victory over the Spartans will give Fresno State 12 wins for the first time in school history. 
Michigan State has had its troubles on defense, and will face a Fresno State team that became the first school to have a 4,000-yard passer (Carr), two 1,000-yard receivers (Rodney Wright and Bernard Berrian) and a 1,000-yard rusher (Paris Gaines). 
Carr emerged as an NFL-caliber quarterback this season, throwing for 4,306 yards and 42 touchdowns. 
Michigan State stumbled down the stretch, losing three in a row before closing the regular season with a 55-7 rout of Missouri.
While Fresno State was sixth nationally in passing effiency, Michigan State was a respectable 14th.
Jeff Smoker led the Spartans' attack, throwing for 2,203 yards and 18 scores this season. 
Charles Rogers, a 6-4 sophomore, emerged as a star this season, catching 57 passes for 1,200 yards and 12 scores. 
The Spartans also can run the ball with T.J. Duckett rushing for 1,236 yards. 
Fresno State has lost its last three bowl games, including a 43-37 setback to Air Force last season.
The Bulldogs nearly overcame a 34-7 deficit and came up short when Jason Simpson overthrew a wide-open receiver in the end zone on a fake field goal in the final minute. 
Michigan State is just 6-9 in bowl games and snapped a four-game losing streak in postseason games with a 37-34 win over Florida in the Citrus Bowl following the 1999 season.
The 87-year-old Zaher Shah would probably return before March, when the national assembly is to be convened, said Zalmai Rassoul, one of his representatives in Rome.
The king, seen by many as a unifying figure for Afghanistan after three decades in exile, is sending Rassoul and Rehim Sherzoi to represent him at Saturday's ceremony in Kabul.
Karzai said his main goal as transitional leader is to "make sure that peace and security is permanent in Afghanistan."
Britain, which is leading an international peacekeeping force to help the transition, said Tuesday that its first troops could arrive in Kabul before the ceremony.
Karzai was scheduled to meet with Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi later Tuesday before seeing Zaher Shah.
He plans to return to Afghanistan on Wednesday after briefing the king and getting his formal blessing.
Karzai and Zaher Shah, who are distant relatives, have a long-standing relationship.
Both are Pashtun, Afghanistan's dominant ethnic group.
Zaher Shah, who has lived in Rome since his 1973 ouster, has for years tried to organize a traditional Afghan assembly, or loya jirga, to form a new government in Afghanistan.
"Before the changes in Afghanistan, I used to come here almost every month to work for the loya jirga," Karzai said before the meeting.
"I used to go and pay my respects to his majesty, the former king.
I've come to do the same here this time."
Rassoul said the aging monarch is heartened by recent events in Afghanistan.
"There's no doubt that he's much more optimistic than in the past," he said.
The national assembly of tribal leaders that Zaher Shah will convene is supposed to choose a government to lead Afghanistan for two years while a constitution is drafted and a judicial system and police force are put into place.
Karzai was named as the head of the interim administration earlier this month during U.N.-sponsored talks in Germany on replacing the ousted Taliban regime.
He was listed as part of the king's delegation to the talks.
According to the agreement, Karzai and his 29-person cabinet will rule the country for six months.
Copyright 2001
The Associated Press.
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
Alabama tries to close its first season under coach Dennis Franchione on a high note when it plays Iowa State in the Independence Bowl. 
Alabama dropped to 3-5 following a 35-21 loss to Louisiana State on Nov. 3, but the Crimson Tide rebounded to win its final three games.
They became bowl eligible with a 28-15 victory over Southern Mississippi on November 29. 
While the Crimson Tide's 6-5 record is mediocre compared to Alabama's lofty standards, it still represents a major improvement from last season's 3-8 finish under Mike DuBose. 
Alabama, which lost its final five games last year, is making its NCAA record 51st postseason appearance and also boasts the most bowl wins with 28.
But the Crimson Tide have lost their last two bowl games, including a 35-34 overtime loss to Michigan in the Orange Bowl following the 1999 season. 
Quarterback Andrew Zow took over for Tyler Watts in the ninth game of the season and seemed to change Alabama's fortunes, guiding the Crimson Tide to three straight victories. 
Ahmaad Galloway finished the regular season with a pair of 100-yard games to lead Alabama in rushing with 881 yards and six touchdowns. 
Iowa State's Dan McCarney has guided the Cyclones to back-to-back bowl appearances for the first time since 1977-78.
Iowa beat Pittsburgh, 37-29, in the Insight.com Bowl last year for its first bowl win in school history. 
Ennis Haywood finished as the second-leading rusher in the Big 12 Conference, running for 1,169 yards and 14 touhdowns on 258 yards. 
Seneca Wallace was named the Big 12's Offensive Newcomer of the Year after passing for 2,044 yards and running for 475.
His 2,519 yards of total offense ranks third of Iowa State's all-time list. 
Iowa State is 12-0 over the past three seasons when Haywood rushes for more than 100 yards.
He surpassed the century mark five times this year. 
Alabama is facing Iowa State for the first time.
The Crimson Tide have an 8-12-1 mark against Big 12 Conference schools.
Kordell Stewart for MVP of the NFL?
Pittsburgh's quarterback has been building a case all season and Sunday night he went over the top in Baltimore.
Stewart, with Jerome Bettis sidelined for the second straight game with an injury, was nearly perfect throwing and running the Steelers to a 26-21 victory.
It clinched the AFC Central Division title for Pittsburgh, which has the AFC's best record at 11-2.
Stewart completed 20 of 31 passes for a career-high 333 yards with two touchdowns, no interceptions and a passer rating of 122.1.
His 90-yard touchdown pass to Bobby Shaw tied for the longest in franchise history.
Wide receiver Plaxico Burress also continued his improvement.
Put down as "Plexi-glass" by the Ravens all week,
Burress caught a career-high 164 yards on eight passes that included a 25-yard touchdown.
His 38-yarder on third down with 5 1/2 minutes left virtually sealed the victory for Pittsburgh.
The Steelers have three games remaining against teams with losing records at home to Detroit Sunday, at Cincinnati and at home with Cleveland .
They would have to lose at least two of those not to get a first-round playoff
bye.
"We've achieved our first goal of winning the division," coach Bill Cowher said.
"We still have three games left and we want to win them all.
We'd like to get that
bye week.
We'd like to have that home-field advantage in Pittsburgh."
Amos Zereoue replaced Chris Fuamatu-Ma'afala, who replaced the injured Bettis as the starter.
Zereoue led the Steelers with 73 yards rushing on 16 carries after Fuamatu-Ma'afala was ineffective.
The only lingering problem for Pittsburgh came from their kicker, Kris Brown.
He missed another field goal, this from 32 yards, and has now missed 12 this season.
His four misses against Baltimore Nov. 4 cost the Steelers a victory and he missed two against the Jets Dec. 9.
He did make two field goals against Baltimore from 22 and 33 yards.
The Steelers' offense kept the ball for 41 minutes and five seconds, and their defense was on the field for just 18:55.
Coach Bill Cowher grew weary of hearing Baltimore coach Brian Billick constantly remind everyone that he has never lost in Pittsburgh.
Cowher, after running his record to 4-0 in Baltimore's PSINet Stadium, said: "Their coach talks about how he likes to come to Pittsburgh, but I don't want to make a statement about it."
Kordell Stewart: "
Considering all the things that have taken place and what this game meant, it's one of the best games of my career."
Plaxico Burress: "They were doing a lot of talking all week, calling me 'Plexi-glass.'
They know my name now."
Stewart's 90-yard TD pass to Bobby Shaw tied one thrown by Terry Bradshaw to Mark Malone in 1981 for the longest in team history.
Bubby Brister also threw a 90-yarder to Dwight Stone in 1990 but Stone did not score.
: A-plus QB Kordell Stewart has never been better.
He completed 20 of 31 passes for two TDs, including a franchise-tying 90-yarder to Bobby Shaw.
He had a passer rating of 122.1.
WR Plaxico Burress caught eight of those passes for 164 yards and a 25-yard TD.
Stewart did not throw an interception.
: B-plus Against one of the better rush defenses in the league, the Steelers managed 158 yards and a 4.1-yard average without RB Jerome Bettis.
Amos Zereoue replaced an ineffective Chris Fuamatu-Ma'afala and ran 73 yards, with a 4.6 average per carry.
Stewart added 55 yards on 10 carries.
: C-plus Some sloppy play in the fourth quarter turned what had been a good performance into a close game.
Elvis Grbac completed 20 of 38 passes for 159 yards and two touchdowns, both in the final 6 1/2 minutes of the game.
Chad Scott had the only interception, his career-high fifth.
Grbac was sacked just twice.
: B-plus The Ravens did not try much.
They ran only 13 times and gained only 58 yards as the Steelers' offense kept the ball away from them and limited their chances to run.
Nearly all of their yards were produced on three carries of 17, 16 and 12.
Grbac ran for his first touchdown of the season, from two yards.
: D This looms as an Achilles heel for the Steelers in the playoffs.
Kris Brown missed a 32-yard field goal and the Ravens had too many long returns.
Jermaine Lewis returned a punt 62 yards and Baltimore often had great field position after kickoffs.
The Steelers also had to call time out before one field-goal try when they had only 10 men on the field.
: B Bill Cowher keeps making a case for Coach of the Year.
Their offensive game plan was nearly perfect despite not having Jerome Bettis.
They put things in the hands of Kordell Stewart as their confidence grows stronger in their quarterback.
There were some lapses on defense in the fourth quarter, and while that was not a coaching problem there were some inexcusable problems on special teams that were.
Jerome Bettis, after sitting out two games with a groin/hip injury, will be almost 100 percent according to Cowher for next week's game against Detroit.
Bettis could have played against the Ravens.
Amos Zereoue re-injured his shoulder late in the game against Baltimore.
He separated it at the end of October and takes a painkilling shot before each game.
His status for next Sunday is unknown.
Earl Holmes continues to start and play on running downs but a knee injury caused the Steelers to remove him on passing downs again.
Veteran Mike Jones played the MLB in their dime defense.
Quarterback Donovan McNabb took his worst physical beating of the season in Sunday's 20-6 win over the Washington Redskins.
McNabb, who completed just 16 of 34 passes and had the first three-interception game of his career, took several good shots from Redskins defensive end Bruce Smith.
He played the entire game, but suffered lower back spasms and a sprained wrist.
Neither of the injuries is expected to keep McNabb out of Saturday's game against the San Francisco 49ers.
Despite his poor statistics, coach Andy Reid seemed pleased with McNabb's performance in the come-from-behind win.
McNabb threw two touchdown passes, including a 62-yard strike to wide receiver Todd Pinkston.
"I think we saw maturity there," Reid said.
"He very easily could've hung his head after those three interceptions.
But he maintained his composure and stayed aggressive."
"I can't believe there's a better safety in the game right now than Brian Dawkins."
Eagles coach Andy Reid.
: C-minus Donovan McNabb completed just 16 of 34 passes and had the first three-interception game of his career.
But he hit enough big passes to put up 20 points.
Had two TD throws.
: D Eagles ground game sputtered again.
They rushed for just 63 yards, and 25 of those came from the quarterback.
Running back Duce Staley averaged just 2.4 yards per carry.
: A Brian Dawkins had two key interceptions that thwarted Redskins scoring opportunities.
Eagles have given up just 11 touchdown passes in 13 games.
: C-minus Eagles continued to have problems stopping the run.
Redskins rushed for 155 yards, including 111 by Stephen Davis..: A-minus David Akers nailed two more field goals.
That's 16 in a row for him.
P Sean Landeta averaged 48.8 yards per attempt.
Coverage units did a pretty good job against Eric Metcalf and Michael Bates.
: B-minus
After talking about the importance of a balanced offense, Andy Reid has gone back to his pass-first philosophy, which resulted in just 11 first downs Sunday and 14 the week before.
Donovan McNabb took a pretty good beating in the game, even though he was sacked only twice.
Suffered lower back spasms and a sprained wrist, but finished the game and will play Saturday against San Francisco.
Look for him to cut down on the running this week though.
Donovan McNabb has 23 rushing attempts in the last three games, including seven Sunday (for 25 yards) against Washington.
McNabb's scrambling is causing him to take a beating though.
He suffered lower back spasms and a sprained wrist Sunday.
Todd Pinkston had his first touchdown catch since the fourth game of the season.
Caught a 62-yard scoring pass from Donovan McNabb.
Pinkston has just 18 receptions in the last eight games after catching 19 in the first five.
Duce Staley continues to be most effective as a pass-receiver rather than a rusher.
He had a club-high eight catches for 73 yards Sunday.
Averaged just 2.4 yards per carry on the ground.
Chad Lewis had just one reception Sunday.
Lewis, who led the team in receptions last season, has just 10 catches in the last six games.
As many as 3,000 people who were exposed to anthrax-laced letters will be offered anthrax vaccine and 40 more days of antibiotics to kill any living spores still present in their bodies, Secretary of Health and Human Services
Tommy Thompson said Tuesday.
The strategy is unprecedented.
Vaccines are typically given before exposure to a disease to prevent illness, not afterward.
The vaccine would be given in three doses over four weeks, Thompson said.
He added that anyone who prefers to avoid vaccination may opt for additional antibiotics or stick to the initial recommended course of 60 days of antibiotics and close medical monitoring.
"We hope to begin vaccinating in the Senate as early as (today) or maybe the next day," Thompson said.
Leaders of the postal workers union have asked for a week to educate their members about the potential benefits and risks of the vaccine, Thompson said.
Postal workers may begin getting vaccine as early as next week.
The initial 60-day period ends this weekend.
"We are concerned that the risk of infection for those who may have been heavily exposed may extend beyond 60 days, perhaps to as much as 90 days," D.A. Henderson, director of the HHS Office of Public Health Preparedness, said Saturday at a meeting to consider the proposal.
Although the anthrax vaccine is said to be safe, it is not fully licensed and will be given on an experimental basis, said Kathy Zoon of the Food and Drug Administration.
Those vaccinated will be studied to determine the vaccine's post-exposure effectiveness.
The decision affects people who work in the Hart Senate Office Building, postal facilities in the Washington and New York metro areas and media offices in New York and Florida.
People at highest risk are those who were in the buildings where letters were opened, people who worked in buildings where people developed inhalation anthrax and those who were found to have inhaled heavy doses of spores.
Previous studies have shown that animals given antibiotics and vaccine appear to survive better than animals given antibiotics alone.
Research out Tuesday underscores the value of offering vaccination to those exposed to anthrax.
Test tube studies show that the bacteria can become resistant to two classes of antibiotics fluoroquinolones (including Cipro) and macrolides (such as erythromycin) after being exposed to low doses of the drugs for 21 days.
It is "quite possible the drugs being used today may not be effective after a prolonged period of time," said researcher Itzhak Brook of the Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute in Bethesda, Md.
No resistance to doxycycline was seen during the three-week study, though it's possible that resistance would develop after a longer exposure, Brook told the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy in Chicago.
He emphasized that what occurs in a test tube may not be mirrored in the human body.
Brook endorses adding vaccine to the combination of drugs now recommended for reducing the risk of inhalation anthrax in people who were exposed.
Ind.
The lies George O'Leary lived for 21 years unraveled in a span of about 30 hours, leaving him jobless and Notre Dame embarrassed and without a coach.
It began 6 p.m. Wednesday with a question about O'Leary's playing career at New Hampshire and ended shortly before midnight Thursday, hours after O'Leary admitted to Notre Dame that he had made up the master's degree in education from New York University included in his biographical sketch.
"It was a very disappointing and sad set of events," Louis M. Nanni, vice president of public affairs and communication, said Sunday.
Notre Dame's sports information office got a call Wednesday from The Union Leader of Manchester, N.H., about a story on the new Notre Dame football coach, whose biographical sketch said that he had earned three letters as a UNH football player.
The Union Leader interviewed the man who was New Hampshire football coach at the time, an assistant and some players, and none of them remembered O'Leary playing in a game, much less earning three letters.
John Heisler, a Notre Dame associate athletic director, interrupted a meeting O'Leary was in about 6 p.m. Wednesday and asked him about his playing days.
O'Leary admitted he had not earned three letters.
In fact, he said he had attended New Hampshire only two years and had not played in any games because he had mononucleosis the first year and a knee injury the second.
O'Leary said someone must have made a mistake along the way in his biographical sketch and he never noticed.
"Frankly, at this point I didn't have the sense that it was a big deal," Heisler said.
"This was not something that anybody was too concerned about."
The Union Leader pressed on, however, and got a copy of a handwritten personal information form still on record at Syracuse, where O'Leary got his first assistant coach's job in 1980.
The Union Leader again contacted Notre Dame, this time asking Nanni for a response.
Nanni reached O'Leary, who was in New Jersey on a recruiting trip.
He asked O'Leary if he had filled out the sheet that said he was a three-time letter winner at New Hampshire.
O'Leary immediately offered to resign, but university officials told him they did not accept.
"We said, 'No, we'll weather this storm, we'll stick together,"' Nanni said.
Nanni said he and others began working on a statement from O'Leary expressing remorse for the action, along with a statement of support from athletic director Kevin White.
"It was going to express regret as well, but we were going to move forward," Nanni said.
Nanni said it was at this point that he asked O'Leary if there was anything else in his background that Notre Dame officials would be surprised by.
"He kind of cryptically talked about a few different things.
I then asked him if they were to look at his records with his master's degree at NYU, would it be fair to say they're not going to find your name there?
He said, 'Yeah, that would be fair to say that."
That's when Nanni decided to get together a group of Notre Dame administrators, including White and the Rev. Edward A. Malloy, the university president.
"We talked it through and looking at the details of the things we felt there was just a breach of trust there," Nanni said.
"George offered to resign five or six times during the course of that afternoon and evening.
Finally late that evening we decided to accept it.
He faxed over a statement around 12:30."
O'Leary flew back to South Bend early Friday morning, picked up the few things he had put in his office and took the Notre Dame private plane back to Atlanta.
About 9:15 a.m., the university sent a copy of a news release announcing O'Leary's resignation to trustees, university officers and faculty board members.
The release was sent to the media about 15 minutes later.
Nanni said what made the revelation especially surprising was the fact that everything university officials had heard in interviewing about 50 people about O'Leary was that he was honest and a man of integrity.
"Even after the story broke, we heard the same things," Nanni said.
Despite some statements by students and alumni that White is to blame, Nanni said the university still has confidence in him.
"We know that obviously he has taken a lot of heat at this moment," Nanni said.
"So goes the job of being the athletic director at Notre Dame, especially when it pertains to something going wrong in the football arena."
Nanni also said the hiring fiasco also has hurt Notre Dame's credibility, at least in the short term.
"In the long run, that remains to be seen," he said.
"If we hire the right coach who is the right fit and comes and restores this program to national prominence, people are going to say in retrospect, 'This was divine providence at work.'
So a lot certainly rests on the next hire."
Copyright 2001
The Associated Press.
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
With seven shopping days until Christmas, desperation selling has set in.
Retailers posted grim results in the second week of December, leaving them biting their nails and hoping consumers come rushing through the doors to make last-minute purchases in the final week before Christmas, two reports showed Tuesday.
U.S. chain store sales slipped 0.5% during the week ended Dec. 15, the third straight week of declines, the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi and UBS Warburg reported in their weekly chain store sales snapshot. 
Separately, the Redbook retail sales average tumbled 4.6% in the two weeks ended Dec. 15, compared with the same period in November.
Early sales got people into stores, but shoppers are sticking to their budgets.
Now, retailers are trying for a big finish with discounts on the discounts, marathon hours and for e-tailers guaranteed Christmas delivery.
"It's panic time for a lot of them, and it's unfortunate," says Carl Steidtmann, chief economist at Deloitte & Touche.
The consultancy released its latest holiday shopping survey Monday.
The poll of shoppers, taken Dec. 7-13, found that 80% still plan to stay in their budgets (an estimated average of $800), the same as before Thanksgiving.
Thus, the final stretch of the shopping season will be uphill for retailers who have battled the economy, layoffs and warm weather as much as one another.
"It's been a little too much for them to overcome," Steidtmann says.
"For apparel retailers, there's not much they can do to save the season."
Earlier, retailers had hoped the big price cuts would make up in volume what they cost in margin.
Unable to close the Gap.
Gap started the holiday season with same-store sales down 25% for November vs. a year ago.
Now, it's trying to clear inventory with up to 60% off.
It has cut prices on about 543 items, triple the number of items discounted last year.
Coupons by the hour.
Macy's begins four-hour specials today and Wednesday.
Procrastinators also can use extra 15% discount coupons at Macy's and rival Lord & Taylor Tuesday and Wednesday.
Moonlight specials.
From Thursday at 6 a.m. through Christmas Eve, Kmart stores will be open 110 consecutive hours.
At its Web site, a marked product ordered by noon ET Friday will arrive by Dec. 25 or the gift is free (up to $100).
Deloitte & Touche says 50% of women had at least 75% of their shopping done by Dec. 14, vs. 40% of men.
"As the shopping season winds down, retailers' best bet could be to target the male shoppers," says Tara Weiner of Deloitte & Touche.
And there's still Christmas Eve.
The International Council on Shopping Centers says the extra day after the weekend could account for 5% of holiday sales.
And yet the National Guard's commanding generals usually make more money than the governors who are their commanders-in-chief.
In the case of Connecticut, the National Guard commander earns more than twice as much as the governor.
Welcome to the rarefied world of the adjutant general, the official name for America's 50 state National Guard leaders.
Together, the size of the force they command is larger than the military of every country in NATO except Turkey.
And they rule their state militaries with unrivaled autonomy.
"Becoming an adjutant general is like being coronated," says Maj.
Gen. Paul Monroe, who commands the 20,000-member California National Guard, the nation's largest.
Soon after taking the adjutant general post in May 1999, Monroe made what he thought was an innocent remark about the carpeting in his office to several subordinate officers.
The next day when he walked in, the carpet had been replaced.
"You just can't believe how you are treated all of the sudden.
It can really go to your head," Monroe says.
The nation's National Guard commanders are the most powerful yet anonymous military leaders in the nation.
It's a safe bet that most people don't know the meaning of the title "adjutant general," let alone the name of their state's National Guard commander.
Adjutants general lead National Guard contingents in 50 states plus the District of Columbia, Guam, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands.
Together, these two-star generals command an Army and Air Guard force of about 460,000 troops.
Few military commanders anywhere are compensated so well.
A review of adjutant general salaries by USA TODAY shows that 41 state Guard commanders earned more than their governors last year.
Thirteen of them earned more than the nation's top active-duty general.
Gen. Hugh Shelton, then-chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, commanded 1.4 million regular troops and was paid about $132,100.
Maj.
Gen. William Cugno, the adjutant general of Connecticut, earned about $166,300 while commanding a force of 5,000.
Adjutants general aren't chosen the same way as active duty or Reserve military officers, who must rise through the ranks and compete nationally for promotions.
In all but two of the 50 states, governors appoint their National Guard commanders.
In South Carolina and Vermont, adjutants general are elected by the people and the Legislature, respectively.
Sometimes, the selections backfire.
In the past decade, adjutants general from at least nine states have committed offenses that include strong-arming subordinates for campaign contributions, using military aircraft for personal vacations, improperly retaliating against officers reporting misconduct and lying to federal investigators.
The litany of problems can be blamed partly on how state commanders are chosen, argues Buddy Stroud, the former adjutant general in Louisiana.
Some adjutants general are appointed to the position without having climbed a career ladder that would properly prepare them for a top command and the perks that come with the job, Stroud says.
"All of the sudden, they have 10,000 soldiers and airmen, cars, airplanes you can go anywhere in the world you want," he says.
Stroud says that many adjutants general know that even if they violate military regulations they probably will stay in office until their terms are up.
Instances in which governors have relieved their state Guard commanders are rare, Defense Department documents show.
Of the nine top commanders who were found to have committed serious violations of military rules in the past decade, only one was removed from office by a governor.
Two others were removed from office after the FBI or state criminal investigators uncovered corruption.
Sometimes even their own commanders-in-chief can't get rid of them.
In one little-noticed case a decade ago, an adjutant general who had been relieved of command by his governor tried to take back command of the Mississippi National Guard when the governor traveled out of state.
Gov. Ray Mabus demoted Adjutant General Jim Farmer in 1990.
Mabus said Farmer had quietly bought a share in a convenience store venture near one of two gates to Camp Shelby, a military training facility south of Hattiesburg, Miss., and used his authority to close the other gate.
At the time of his investment, Farmer also had insider information about a planned expansion of the camp, which amounted to a conflict of interest, Mabus charged.
The power struggle wound up in federal court; Farmer never regained power, although he continued to draw a salary and wear his uniform.
Mabus says he enlisted the help of National Guard headquarters in Washington to get rid of Farmer but was unable to remove him.
A federal judge reviewing the case later wrote that the dispute seemed "more at home in the plot of a class B movie about a fictional coup d'?tat in a third-world country than to present-day happenings in a sovereign state."
Farmer later used his clout to get revenge: He mobilized the state's 16,000 Guardsmen against Mabus in the 1991 election, and Mabus lost.
U.S. and British commandos are leading the hunt for Osama bin Laden and leaders of his al-Qaeda terrorist network amid reports the fugitives escaped into Pakistan and are being protected by authorities there.
Pakistan denied the reports.
Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz issued a warning against helping bin Laden.
"Any country in the world that would knowingly harbor bin Laden would be out of their minds," Wolfowitz said.
"I think they've seen what happened to the Taliban, and I think that's probably a pretty good lesson for people."
The U.S. military helped oust the Taliban after the terrorist attacks on New York City and Washington on Sept. 11.
Bin Laden is suspected of masterminding the attacks from Afghanistan.
Pentagon officials say the trail has grown cold for both bin Laden and Taliban leader Mohammed Omar, whose regime gave al-Qaeda safe haven in Afghanistan.
Wolfowitz said Omar may have fled the country.
However, several Afghan tribal leaders say he is holed up north of Kandahar with hundreds of Taliban loyalists.
It was not clear whether Afghan forces wanted to try to track him down.
One defense official claimed a bin Laden escape could benefit the war on terrorism because popular support for continued military action in other regions would remain strong.
Another noted that NATO forces still have not apprehended the most notorious war criminals of the war in Bosnia, six years after that conflict ended.
U.S. officials hope to gain information from 15 upper-echelon Taliban and al-Qaeda fighters who were captured and now imprisoned in Kandahar.
FBI agents are helping conduct interrogations.
The search is not restricted to Afghanistan.
Wolfowitz said the United States has begun focusing on nations where bin Laden's followers may run or where al-Qaeda bases exist.
Illustrating the point, Yemeni troops trained by U.S. commandos stormed a hideout of Islamic militants in that nation on the Arabian Peninsula to try to capture suspected al-Qaeda members.
Officials said 12 people on both sides died in the battle.
In Afghanistan, a dozen countries were preparing to bring in peacekeeping troops.
U.S. forces are not expected to participate, but Britain said it could have an initial force of 200 in the capital, Kabul, by Saturday.
The force could number 5,000, but some Afghans want less.
Hamid Karzai, chosen to lead the country, vowed to end terrorism, "warlordism" and the rule of the gun.
"I am very, very determined.
Terrorism has made our people suffer unbelievably difficult times," he said.
Most of the phantom troops, commonly called ghost soldiers, have stopped going to monthly Guard drills and are no longer being paid.
They are kept on rosters for months, and sometimes years, while replacement troops are recruited or their official discharges are completed, according to government documents and interviews with more than 40 National Guardsmen.
Officials in many states create the phantom troops because of difficulties recruiting and keeping soldiers.
They fear that the federal government will shift their understaffed units, and potentially millions of dollars, to states that can recruit enough troops to fill them.
Day-to-day control of the Guard rests at the state level, but 95% of its money about $13 billion last year comes from the federal government.
The government does not lose money as a result of ghost soldiers because they are not counted for salary purposes.
By exaggerating staffing levels, Guard commanders make anemic units appear combat-ready in official reports to the Pentagon and to the National Guard Bureau in Washington, former Guard personnel officers say.
The General Accounting Office (GAO), Congress' watchdog agency, has been investigating ghost soldiers for a year but has yet to determine the extent of the problem.
The U.S. Defense Criminal Investigative Service recently completed a two-year investigation of ghost troops in Arizona.
Its report has been turned over to the U.S. attorney for Arizona for possible criminal action, the investigation service says.
The investigators say that in Arizona, one of every eight soldier discharges took longer than 200 days to process.
One former Guard soldier from Arizona says he was kept on the rolls for two years after leaving the Guard.
The problem with ghost soldiers is limited to the almost 350,000-member Army National Guard.
The Air National Guard, which has 110,000 airmen, typically does not have ghost troops.
There is no indication that any of the Guard units called up since Sept. 11 have insufficient numbers of troops.
In some cases, however, the mobilized units have been created from Guard soldiers pulled from several units.
interviewed current and former Army Guard troops who range in rank from sergeant to one-star general.
They provided similar accounts of how Guard units inflate their reported troop numbers, often without consequence.
Some spoke publicly despite fear of retribution.
California has the nation's largest National Guard force, with about 20,000 Army and Air Guard troops on the rolls.
But several Army Guard soldiers say that number is misleading and padding troop numbers is a common practice.
Sgt.
1st Class Tom Petry says his 200-man infantry company, mobilized to go to the Middle East in September, listed 70 soldiers on its roster who seldom if ever attended monthly drills. 
"I will stand in front of a congressional committee if I have to tell them about this," says Petry, who has been unable to perform his duties as a unit administrator since May because of chronic medical problems.
He is due to be discharged early next year.
He says the ghost soldiers were being carried on the books to make his infantry company appear combat-ready.
Guard officials in California deny Petry's allegation.
They say their records show 50 unpaid soldiers in the 800-member battalion that Petry's company is part of.
They also say that statewide, the number of unpaid soldiers is declining rapidly as a result of a new emphasis on discharging troops quickly.
Several other California Guard officers and enlisted men say the state has a history of inflating troop levels, however.
Although not able to confirm Petry's charge, four other Guardsmen former Staff Sgt.
Ed Green, former Staff Sgt.
Rick Ortega, Maj.
John Kanaley and retired Col
. Bill Wenger say padding troop numbers is common.
Kanaley, a police officer in Long Beach, Calif., who left the Guard last month to transfer to the Army Reserve, says that when he was an officer in California's 40th Infantry Division from 1996 to 1998, up to 20% of his 800-man battalion were ghost soldiers.
Frequently, Kanaley says, soldiers who never showed up were marked on pay records as present, having made up the drills or were given excused absences even though they shouldn't have been.
"You feel like you're betraying the system talking about this, but sometimes these things need to be brought out," Kanaley says.
Kanaley says he believes the same practices continue today.
Maj.
Gen. Paul Monroe, who took command of the California National Guard two years ago, acknowledges that 5% of the troops listed on statewide rosters exist only on paper.
He did not comment on the number of ghost soldiers in individual units.
Monroe says one of his biggest challenges is fixing a culture that tolerates officers filing misleading reports to make their units seem combat-ready.
Monroe says he recently fired several senior officers because he didn't believe their troop reports.
He also says ghost soldiers are a problem all across the Army National Guard.
In Illinois, state officials say that 3% to 5% of Army Guard troops statewide are being carried on the rolls as they await discharge.
But Dave McGinnis, a retired colonel who helped National Guard headquarters develop methods to track ghost soldiers several years ago, reviewed personnel summaries from Illinois for USA TODAY and came to a different conclusion. 
McGinnis says that based on monthly averages for 2000 and 2001, nearly 20% of Illinois' 10,200 Army Guard troops are not regularly participating Guard members.
They're either absent without leave, absent with an excuse or transferring to another unit.
Maj.
Gen. David Harris, commander of the Illinois National Guard, says McGinnis' assessment is "preposterous and not in the realm of reality."
However, one week after Harris discounted McGinnis' assessment, Guard officials in Illinois and at National Guard headquarters in Washington called USA TODAY to acknowledge inadequacies with the troop numbers that Illinois had provided the newspaper.
Illinois officials said there were inaccuracies in the data because of "bad chartsmanship," and they said an unspecified number of troops who had previously left the Army Guard had not been removed from statewide troop rolls.
They were unable to provide the percentage of ghost soldiers on their rosters.
Frank Jourige experienced the ghost soldier phenomenon personally.
He left the Illinois Guard five years ago, but discovered last year that he was still on the rolls as a member of a transportation unit in Chicago.
Jourige learned he was a ghost soldier after he got a letter from the federal government saying he owed four years' worth of payments on a Guard life insurance policy.
He says his credit rating was nearly ruined because someone forged paperwork to keep him on the rolls even though he wasn't getting paid.
This year, after an internal investigation, state Guard officials told USA TODAY that Jourige's story is true.
Jourige says Illinois investigators told him they had discovered four similar cases.
Larry Metcalf, who worked in the personnel section at Arizona Guard headquarters, says he saw stacks of discharge papers sitting for months.
The soldiers, though no longer attending drills, were still counted on the state's rolls without pay, Metcalf says. 
After he left the Arizona Guard in January 1999, Metcalf says, he was carried for two years as an unpaid ghost soldier.
At the time, the 3,800-member Arizona Army Guard was claiming "hundreds" more soldiers on the rolls than it had, he says.
Dean LeVay, a former Army Guard colonel in Arizona who is now a federal immigration judge, says that when he retired from the Guard in 1998, it was common for the state to inflate troop reports.
LeVay says he doesn't know how many ghost soldiers there were, but he attended meetings at which senior officers bragged about how they prevented the state from losing units by manipulating discharges.
"It shocked and angered me," LeVay says.
He didn't report it, he says, because "I didn't think anybody would pay attention."
The Arizona National Guard denies loading its ranks with ghosts.
Officials declined to be specific but said they have greatly reduced the number of unpaid soldiers on the rolls and have one of the lowest rates in the nation.
Guard officers from Texas, Maryland, Wyoming, Virginia and South Carolina say their states also have counted soldiers on the rolls after they have left the Guard for up to two years in some cases.
Two officers in South Carolina say that in 1999, state officials delayed discharging nearly 500 members of a 4,300-soldier combat infantry brigade.
They say state commanders wanted the brigade to appear adequately staffed, even though nearly one in eight soldiers was a ghost.
South Carolina Guard officials say the allegations are untrue.
They acknowledge problems with backlogged discharges in 1999 but say they never had more than 200 in the combat brigade.
Jeffrey Goldfarb, a former sergeant in the Wyoming Guard, says that from 1989 to 1996, ghost soldiers were common in his state.
Goldfarb says 10 of the 65 soldiers in his headquarters company were phantoms.
The problems continued after Goldfarb left.
Two officers say an Army Inspector General investigation in 1999 found dozens of ghost soldiers on the state's rolls, including troops who had died.
Wyoming officials, citing privacy concerns, declined to discuss the case.
Bill Burkett, a former lieutenant colonel in the Texas National Guard, says that four years ago, he and a group of officers informed Adjutant General Danny James, the state commander, that 7% of the Texas Army Guard's 16,300 troops were ghost soldiers.
Burkett and others say that despite promises to fix the problem, the Texas Army Guard continues to include soldiers who shouldn't be on the rolls.
According to figures provided by the National Guard Bureau, over the past two years, Texas has had anywhere from 1,300 to 1,800 unpaid soldiers on its rolls, more than 11% at its peak. 
Asked about the number of unpaid soldiers on the rolls, James' office replied with a brief e-mail saying that 3.7% of Texas Army Guard troops are waiting to be discharged.
Each state recruits its own National Guard soldiers and is responsible for reporting troop levels monthly to the National Guard Bureau and quarterly to the Pentagon.
Both the bureau in Washington and the Pentagon use the reports to keep track of how many soldiers each state has in each unit, so they know whether the units are at battle strength.
However, it's easy to pad those reports because most Guard troops are part-time soldiers who typically are required to show up for drills only one weekend a month and two weeks during the summer.
If the soldiers don't show up, the Guard often keeps them on the records by classifying them in one of several categories of excused absences or by authorizing make-up drills.
A unit that can't fill 70% of its ranks is categorized at the bottom of a readiness scale as incapable of performing "most of its wartime missions."
Certain kinds of units, such as infantry, may have more difficulty keeping their ranks full than other kinds.
If a unit can't regularly fill at least 70% of its ranks, the Pentagon could transfer that unit's function and federal funding to a state that can.
Last year, the Guard Bureau took troops from Indiana and Massachusetts because of personnel shortfalls.
Indiana lost 1,300 Army Guard soldiers and Massachusetts about 550.
A state's National Guard is funded each year based on a formula that counts how many soldiers are showing up for drills and being paid.
The formula is designed so it does not reward states that pad their rolls with unpaid ghost soldiers.
However, funding levels are not adjusted to reflect soldiers who leave the Guard after the money has been allocated.
If states get money for soldiers that aren't showing up for drills, they are allowed to use the money for training or other purposes.
The GAO is trying to determine how much money the Guard has received for troops it doesn't have.
Officials at the National Guard Bureau acknowledge the Guard had problems with inflated troop reports several years ago.
But, they say, they have cracked down on the problem.
The Guard Bureau commander, Lt. Gen. Davis, says some states leave discharged soldiers on the rolls because they don't have enough clerks to do the paperwork.
In the late 1980s, officials at the bureau in Washington began developing databases designed to catch states that were harboring ghost soldiers.
The databases use pay records from Guard drill attendance to count how many soldiers each state has.
Guard soldiers are paid based on the number of drills they attend.
Those who miss more than three consecutive months of weekend drills without a valid excuse are typically supposed to be discharged.
The Guard Bureau developed a name for these unpaid soldiers: "No Vals," which stands for "no value."
Guard Bureau personnel officials say they are confident their databases make it impossible for states to hide phantom troops.
But McGinnis, the former director of force management at National Guard headquarters who examined Illinois' troop data, says the National Guard is na?ve at best.
He and others say some states have figured out how to hide ghost soldiers with administrative sleight of hand, by simply classifying troops in a temporary no-pay category such as excused leave.
That way they are counted as part of the unit but aren't paid.
"Anytime you give them an opportunity, someone will figure out how to beat the system," McGinnis says.
McGinnis says he believes the number of ghosts in the Guard as a whole is double the 5% figure that Guard and Pentagon figures show.
Ed Green, a former staff sergeant in the California Guard, agrees with McGinnis that Guard commanders know how to beat the system.
When he left the California Guard in 1999, Green says commanders employed a variety of tricks to pad their rolls.
One was to authorize soldiers absent from drills to show up at a later date to make up missed training, even when they knew they wouldn't.
Mark DePue, a former lieutenant colonel who retired from the Illinois Army Guard in April, says he discovered his state was issuing orders to discharge soldiers but was not deleting the soldiers' names from personnel databases.
The practice greatly inflated the state's troop numbers, DePue says.
"The real harm is when units get called up, and ... we have given a grossly false picture," he says.
"When we get to combat, and we are not ready, the unit pays the price, and the nation pays the price."
The meeting is Rumsfeld's first at NATO since the Sept. 11 attacks in New York in Washington, and fellow defense ministers are eager to hear his views on the next step in the campaign.
It is also the first occasion allied defense ministers have had to talk with a top American official since the United States announced its intention to abandon its 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile treaty with Russia, a subject that worries many of Washington's friends.has invoked Article 5 of its founding treaty, declaring that the attacks on the United States in September should be treated as an attack on all 19.
But the alliance has had no front-line role in the war in Afghanistan and none is envisaged.
Though a 1999 strategic plan developed by NATO points to terrorism and the spread of weapons of mass destruction among the major threats facing NATO in the future, the alliance is still heavily geared toward fighting wars of territorial defense and not the shadowy forces of terror.
Russian Defense Minister Sergei Ivanov also is in Brussels and will be talking with NATO about plans for closer relations between the former adversaries.
Rumsfeld met with Ivanov separately Monday night.
Earlier this month, NATO foreign ministers launched a plan for closer relations with Moscow, instructing alliance officials to begin developing new council where Russia could join with the allies in discussion, planning and even decision-making on specific subjects.
Work is expected to be completed by next spring.
The defense ministers will begin to consider the subject matter that the new NATO-Russia council might cover, the senior official said.
Also on the ministerial agenda is the Balkans, where the alliance is leading about 60,000 troops in three separate military operations, in Bosnia, Kosovo and Macedonia.
The defense ministers will be looking at ways to make the Balkans operations more efficient, and, eventually, to reduce their size.
Copyright 2001
The Associated Press.
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
Fleischer's statement was the strongest to date by the Bush administration about who may be behind the attacks, and it contradicted earlier speculation that the anthrax was the work of foreign terrorists.
An FBI profile describes the possible culprit as a male loner with a scientific background.
Fleischer declined to elaborate.
"I can't give you the scientific reasons behind it, but you can assume that they're based on investigative and scientific means," he said.
His remarks came after revelations that the Army has manufactured powdered, or "weapons-grade," anthrax since the Persian Gulf War to test the effectiveness of its equipment against a biological attack.
The Army said none of its anthrax is missing.
The CIA, which also used anthrax to study biological warfare threats, has accounted for all of its anthrax, a spokesman said.
Investigators are focusing their hunt for the perpetrator on about 20 U.S. laboratories.
Despite hopes that an anthrax-laced letter sent to Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., could yield important clues, such as a fingerprint, preliminary tests have turned up no useful evidence, a senior law enforcement official said. 
Efforts continued to cleanse anthrax spores from the Hart Senate Office Building, which has been closed since Oct. 15.
The building was pumped with chlorine dioxide for a second time on Monday to destroy spores that remained after the building was fumigated last month.
Officials said they could not predict when the building, which contains offices for 50 senators, would reopen.
At the State Department, the FBI was investigating a white powder found in an envelope addressed to Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage. 
Health and Human Services
Secretary Tommy Thompson is expected to decide this week whether to recommend voluntary anthrax vaccinations for about 3,000 people who had high levels of exposure to it.
Studies show that combining antibiotic treatments with anthrax vaccinations boosts survival rates.
Vaccination would be recommended for those who inhaled a heavy dose of anthrax spores, worked in buildings where tainted letters were opened, had co-workers who developed inhalation anthrax, or were advised to take antibiotics for two months. 
Some critics, however, raised concerns about adverse side effects from the vaccine, especially among older workers in less than robust health.
As many as 3,000 people who were exposed to anthrax bacteria, including several hundred Washington postal employees and Capitol Hill workers, may be asked to take an anthrax vaccine this week because of fears they still harbor the deadly spores in their bodies.
The vaccination program would be intended for people recently exposed to anthrax-laden letters and who are considered at high risk even after taking antibiotics for 60 days.
Although the anthrax vaccine is said to be safe, federal officials said any vaccinations would take place on an "experimental" basis because the vaccine has not received full government approval.
Senior scientists will make a final recommendation about the plan to Health and Human Services Secretary Tommy G. Thompson early this week.
The first vaccinations could take place within the week, officials said.
The plan promises to be controversial:
Local health officials, who would be central to the implementation of any program, said they were unconvinced the vaccinations are necessary.
A representative from a postal workers association expressed concern about giving the experimental vaccine to mail carriers, many of whom he said are middle-aged and had other health problems.
Critics of the anthrax vaccine also pointed out that it has not passed all of the government's licensing inspections.
At a meeting in downtown Washington yesterday, top federal scientists said the measure was prompted by fears that anthrax spores could lie dormant in people beyond 60 days, before erupting in a fatal burst.
"The risk of infection . . . may be as long as 90 days," said D.A. Henderson, director of the Office of Public Health Preparedness at the Department of Health and Human Services.
"That we don't have definitive answers is frustrating for all of us."
Many local workers were started on antibiotics in early October -- and some have completed the 60-day treatment.
Bradley Perkins, an anthrax expert at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said that workers still thought to be at highest risk were those in buildings where the letters were opened, those who worked in facilities where others had fallen sick with inhalation anthrax and those shown to have inhaled large numbers of spores.
Nasal swabs from some Senate staffers showed more spores than were found in entire buildings elsewhere, said Greg Martin, a Walter Reed infectious diseases expert.
Martin has told 75 Senate workers who are at highest risk to continue taking antibiotics past 60 days as a decision about vaccinations is being made.
Apart from Capitol Hill staffers, workers at the Brentwood postal facility in Washington topped the list of those at greatest risk, said Perkins, followed by those at the State Department annex where spores were found and New Jersey postal workers.
Another CDC official, Nancy Rosenstein, said 2,510 Washington postal workers and 95 staffers on Capitol Hill may still be at high risk.
Many, but not all, would be counted among the 3,000 potential candidates for vaccination.
If the vaccination plan is approved, doctors will administer three injections at two-week intervals.
Workers will be told to continue antibiotics until the final dose.
Alternative treatment options could include simple monitoring for anthrax symptoms or an extension of antibiotics without vaccination.
Doctors are uncomfortable with the first choice because anthrax symptoms are easily confused with the flu.
They are also concerned that the second choice may not offer enough protection.
Data on every aspect of human anthrax is limited by the disease's rarity -- only 18 cases of inhalation anthrax have occurred in the United States in the 20th century, Henderson said.
But studies in animals exposed to anthrax spores show that although antibiotics hold the disease at bay, some animals develop the disease after the antibiotics are stopped.
Other studies have shown that 2 percent of anthrax spores inside animals are viable after 50 days, 1 percent after 75 days and trace amounts after 100 days.
When animals are given a combination of an anthrax vaccine and antibiotics, they have better survival rates than animals given antibiotics alone.
Scientists believe the vaccine helps the immune system build defenses that are still effective when the antibiotics are stopped.
One human study found that the vaccine protected mill workers from cutaneous anthrax.
But all previous studies tested the vaccine before people or animals were exposed to spores -- one reason that giving vaccines after exposure is considered experimental.
The other reason is that the vaccine stocks that are most likely to be used have not been licensed.
The Food and Drug Administration says the vaccine has passed muster, but its licensing is awaiting final evaluations at BioPort Corp., the Lansing, Mich., company that makes the vaccine.
Since that could take weeks, and because workers completing their 60-day course of antibiotics should, ideally, be vaccinated promptly, the program would be classified as experimental.
All participants would be informed of the risks, and participation would be voluntary. 
Washington's top health officials, Ivan Walks and Larry Siegel, cautioned that any plan must be tailored to meet the needs of local postal workers.
Local mail workers, two of whom died from anthrax, have complained that scant attention was paid to them even as doctors rushed to look after staffers on Capitol Hill.
Many mail workers have also stopped taking antibiotics because of side effects.
Since they have not developed anthrax, there is some question of whether they were really at risk. 
"I am personally unconvinced that I would recommend vaccines to an individual on antibiotics knowing there is not a great risk of getting inhalation anthrax," said Siegel, Washington's deputy health director. 
Initial reaction among local postal workers was mixed: Lenster Banks said the antibiotic Cipro made him dizzy and gave him diarrhea but he would be willing to take a vaccine.
"I'll be the first in line," said Robert Dawson Jr. of Forestville.
"If they don't know if the drugs are enough to kill the spores, I don't think we have any choice."
Cassandra Woodson of Temple Hills was adamantly opposed: "I took the Cipro and I took the doxycycline and they made me sick," she said.
"I'm not taking nothing else."
Staff writer Tracey Reeves contributed to this report.
It appears that the new generation of NBA stars has more clout than its most famous player ever, Michael Jordan.
In the first round of results from fan balloting for the NBA All-Star Game, which will be played Feb. 10 in Philadelphia, Jordan, 38, received the sixth most votes , trailing top vote-getter Vince Carter of the Toronto Raptors by nearly 200,000 votes.
Carter led fan balloting last year.
Jordan, who plays small forward for the Washington Wizards but is listed as a guard, trails Philadelphia's Allen Iverson in the voting among Eastern Conference guards.
Jordan, who came out of a three-year retirement, played in the All-Star Game in all 13 years of his career, winning the MVP award three times.
No other Wizards players received significant votes.
Coach Doug Collins said yesterday that guard Richard Hamilton, named the league's co-player of the week on Monday, is playing at an all-star level.
Other than Iverson, those ahead of Jordan in overall balloting are Shaquille O'Neal and Kobe Bryant of the Los Angeles Lakers, and Minnesota Timberwolves forward Kevin Garnett .
Houston Rockets guard Steve Francis is the second-leading vote-getter among Western Conference guards .
Francis has been on the injured list with a foot injury.
Fan balloting determines the All-Star Game starters.
Coaches pick the remaining players.
Investors did an about-face Monday, showering Amgen's proposed $16.8 billion acqusition of Immunex Corp. with approval after punishing Amgen the previous week amid worries that the world's largest biotechnology company would pay too much for the rights to the blockbuster arthritis drug Enbrel.
Analysts remained lukewarm toward the deal, however, raising questions about whether Amgen's profit growth will slow as a result.
"Immunex shows very high revenues," said Fariba Ghodsian, an analyst with Los Angeles-based Roth Capital Partners.
"But its profits aren't as high as you would expect."
Thousand Oaks-based Amgen will pay about $14.8 billion in stock and about $2 billion in cash, valuing the Seattle-based Immunex at more than $30 a share.
While the value of the deal rose from its initial $16 billion on Monday's investor enthusiasm, it was still shy of the $18 billion number tossed around at the end of last week, when investors sent Amgen down 13 percent on rumors of talks.
In trading Monday, Amgen rose $3.46, or 6 percent, to $59.49 on the Nasdaq Stock Market, where shares of Immunex rose $3.44, or 13 percent, to $29.06.
Ghodsian said Amgen will likely see profits grow by only 10 percent next year because of the purchase.
Amgen chief executive Kevin Sharer conceded that earnings growth will slow next year from the 20 percent it projected before the deal, he said it shouldn't be too severe maybe 15 percent growth.
"I don't want anybody to think this is going to be easy or a walk in the park," Sharer said during a conference call.
"We don't imagine that."
Immunex expects $750 million in sales this year from its rheumatoid arthritis drug Enbrel, whose profits it shares with American Home Products Corp. of Madison, N.J.
However, Ghodsian estimates that American Home takes 44 percent of Enbrel profits.
Immunex declined to disclose the details of its arrangement with American Home.
American Home, which owns 41 percent of Immunex, said it favored the deal, which will leave it with about 8 percent of Amgen stock.
Other analysts, including Dennis Harp of Deutsche Banc Alex. Brown Inc. , expressed concern that several other companies are developing rheumatoid arthritis drugs that could compete with Enbrel and eat into profits.
The FDA last month approved Amgen's own rheumatoid arthritis drug, Kineret.
However, clinical studies showed Kineret to be less effective than Enbrel, and it wasn't expected to outsell Enbrel.
Analysts did say the two drugs could be sold together and cost savings could be found by combining the company's two rheumatoid arthritis sales forces.
Sharer also said Amgen's drug-making expertise could help alleviate Immunex's struggles to keep up with the demand for Enbrel.
Despite the skepticism, Sharer expects Enbrel revenues will soar to $3 billion by 2005, surpassing the sales of Amgen's two existing blockbuster drugs: Epogen, used to treat anemia, and Neupogen, used to reduce infection in chemotherapy patients.
Those two drugs accounted for a combined $3 billion in sales last year.
Epogen had $1.9 billion in sales last year and Neupogen accounted for about $1 billion.
Since gaining Food and Drug Administration approval in 1998, Enbrel sales have been hampered by limits on production capacity, a problem Sharer said Amgen should be able to alleviate with its 12 years of manufacturing experience.
Amgen expects revenues to hit $5.5 billion and net income of more than $1.5 billion next year.
Amgen now employs 7,000 worldwide and will add 1,400 Immunex employees if the deal is approved by shareholders of both companies and the Federal Trade Commission.
Amgen intends to keep its name.
The deal is the latest in a flurry of planned biotechnology mergers.
Two weeks ago, Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc. announced it would buy COR Therapeutics for $2 billion and MedImmune Inc. said it planned to buy Aviron for $1.3 billion.
However, it is a major strategic departure for Amgen, which has been satisfied to grow internally and through small acquisitions such as its $170 million purchase of Kinetix Pharmaceuticals last year.
Analysts said Sharer, who was named chief executive last year after serving eight years as Amgen's president, is putting his own stamp on the company.
Amgen, launched in 1981 with 20 workers, went by the name Applied Molecular Genetics and experimented with genetically engineered dyes, detergents and animal growth hormones.
Much of that work went nowhere and the company teetered on bankruptcy until one of its scientists in 1983 cloned the protein erythropoieten, better known as Epogen.
The FDA approved Epogen in 1989.
A five-alarm fire damaged the Cathedral of St. John the Divine in upper Manhattan today, gutting the gift shop and severely damaging two priceless 17th-century tapestries at the largest church in the United States.
The cause had not been determined by evening.
Firefighters were called to the cathedral before 7 a.m. after a janitor smelled smoke.
By the time they arrived, the gift shop had burst into flames.
Within an hour the fire had grown into a fierce blaze that filled the cathedral with smoke and sent a gray plume rising above Manhattan's Upper West Side.
"The whole thing was just a huge orange ball of flames," said Dorothy Pappadokas, who plays the cathedral organ and first noticed the fire from her bedroom window.
"It was going up the height of the cathedral walls."
Early this afternoon firemen were still climbing around the outside of the French Gothic structure and spraying out small pockets of fire.
Charred remains of the gift shop's roof lay on the cathedral school's playground, and damaged kneelers lay strewn on the broad front steps.
The smoke that had filled the nave was mostly cleared, and firefighters had pumped out the several inches of water flooding the church floor, said cathedral spokesman Gere Farrah.
The 150 stained glass windows, including the 40-foot Great Rose Window, appeared to be undamaged. 
"This would have been a major catastrophe" had the fire not been controlled, said Edward Dennehy, deputy chief of the fire department's Third Division.
Workers had laid out the damaged tapestries on the cathedral floor and were trying to assess damage.
They are part of a set of 12 tapestries commissioned by the Barberini family and woven in the Vatican.
The cathedral, begun in 1892 and still under construction, is a major New York institution that has grown as a community center since the attacks on the World Trade Center.
Located within a block of Columbia University and St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, the church hosts 500,000 visitors a year.
Since the Sept. 11 attacks, the cathedral has held daily vigils and a steady flow of memorial services that continued through last week.
About 5,000 people attended one service dedicated to victims who died at Windows on the World restaurant.
"After September 11th a lot of people came here to pray," said Sister Faith Margaret, who lives nearby and frequently comes to events at the church.
"It's one more tragedy."
The cathedral school closed today and students were sent home.
The church kept its homeless shelter open and moved its meal service to another church.
Cathedral officials did not know whether or where they would hold upcoming holiday events.
The cathedral had scheduled a steady stream of religious services and musical events, including a Friday performance of Handel's "Messiah."
Nearby synagogues and churches were offering space this afternoon to hold those services; cathedral officials hope to be back in St. John's for Christmas Eve.
"I have always thought of it as so large and indomitable," said James Kowalski, who will become dean of the church in March.
"But what is these days?"
The scientist who helped the United States refine anthrax and turn it into a weapon says the bacteria spores used in the recent attacks could have been processed in a variety of ways, making it impossible to trace their source.
"You can process the stuff in so many different ways
, I don't think that it will be the smoking gun," William C. Patrick III said Tuesday in an interview with The Associated Press.
Patrick, who holds patents for techniques used to make weapons-grade anthrax, said that the type of spores mailed to the offices of Sen. Tom Daschle, D-S.D., and Patrick J. Leahy, D-Vt., could have been processed in a crude laboratory "as long as you are dealing with small quantities of material."
He said anthrax can be cultured on many different growth mediums and that there are many ways to purify and dry it.
Patrick led the Army's biological weapons program at Fort Detrick until the program ended in 1969.
Since then, he has worked as an adviser and consultant on biological warfare issues for the Defense Department.
In 1998, he taught scientists at the Dugway Proving Ground in Utah how to turn wet clusters of bacteria spores into a dry powder, according to The Washington Post.
That technology is not difficult, Patrick said Tuesday.
He said the key to turning anthrax into a weapon is the genetic strain of the microbe.
"It is all in the strain," he said.
"If you have poor strain you're not going to make a good product."
The strain used in the letters mailed to media offices in New York and in Florida has been identified as Ames, a strain that was used in Defense Department testing.
Patrick said that spores mailed to the senators offices are "one step removed from weapons grade."
"It has small particles, with good concentration, (but) it is electrostatic (carries an electrical charge)," said Patrick.
To make the mailed spores suitable for military weapons, the electrical charge would have to be removed.
The electrical charge helps make the spore become airborne at the slightest puff of air.
Investigators have said that the anthrax spores in the letters sent to the senators offices were so charged that they tended to jump off microscope slides and fly about the chamber where they were being examined.
Patrick said the same thing would have happened to anyone who made spores for the anthrax-by-letter attacks.
"It would have been flying all over the room," he said, with up to half the material lost.
If the processing room had a window to the outside, he said, "you could get people infected if they were just passing that window.
"
A person making the spores in a home laboratory, said Patrick, could have protected themselves by wearing a special, easily purchased mask and by taking an antibiotic to prevent infection.
But the process still would have contaminated the room where the work was done, he said.
Patrick said that to turn anthrax into a weapon would involve mixing a cluster of spores with a liquid compound that would cause the individual spores to separate and stay apart.
"How you treat the liquid material determines what the particle size (of the spores) is going to be and what the concentration will be," he said.
Drying the wet spores "is not a technically demanding task," he said.
"You can dry it in many ways even with a heat lamp.
"If you purify the material and dried by a vacuum drum or by spray drying or by freeze drying, the material will be the same," said Patrick.
He said the spores would bear chemical traces of the material used in the wetting compound.
Asked about a report that the spores in the senators' offices bore traces of silica, a drying agent, Patrick said: "I am not going to discuss silica, either the presence or the absence of it."
Another anthrax expert, who asked not to be named, said the characteristics of the spores found in the senators offices suggest the material was spray-dried.
This means that the wet spores would have been sprayed into a drying chamber that absorbed the moisture and trapped the dry spores which could then be packaged.
John Rocker, who never fit in when he joined the Cleveland Indians last season, yesterday was traded to the Texas Rangers for minor league pitcher Dave Elder.
Rocker, whose remarks on racial, ethnic and sexual minorities in a magazine article led to his suspension for two weeks in 2000, will be reunited in Texas with new Rangers general manager John Hart.
"We certainly aren't going into this blind," Hart said.
"We know there are going to be issues.
We feel our organization is prepared to accept those issues.
It goes back to second chances."
Rocker, 27, pitched poorly in Cleveland, going 3-7 with four saves and a 5.45 earned run average in 38 games.
He was handed the closer's job upon arrival in June, but ended up giving it back to Bob Wickman.
Meantime, free agent outfielder Juan Gonzalez said he plans to reject the Cleveland Indians' salary arbitration offer and focus on signing a long-term contract with another club, his agent, Jeff Moorad, said.
Although Gonzalez is free to continue talks with the Indians through Jan. 8, the prospect of him returning to Cleveland is remote.
If Gonzalez had accepted the Indians' arbitration offer, he would have committed himself to playing for Cleveland next season.
"We're quite confident Juan will end up with an attractive multiyear contract," Moorad said.
"The only way we would accept arbitration in Cleveland is if we felt it was the first step to a longer contract with the Indians."
Gonzalez hit .325 with 35 homers and 140 runs batted in last season and finished fifth in the American League MVP voting.
Two members of the New York Yankees' championship teams found new homes.
Chuck Knoblauch signed a one-year contract with the Kansas City Royals, who will use him in left field, and first baseman Tino Martinez signed a three-year deal with the St. Louis Cardinals to replace the retired Mark McGwire.
Knoblauch has been part of three championship teams in New York and one in Minnesota.
He was shifted to the outfield last season because of repeated throwing problems at second base.
Martinez played for the Yankees for the last six seasons and was an instrumental part of four World Series championship teams.
However, the Yankees signed Jason Giambi from Oakland to be their first baseman.
Cardinals Manager Tony La Russa said Martinez's signing will mean that National League rookie of the year Albert Pujols will move to third base.
Meantime, the Yankees announced the signing of pitcher Sterling Hitchcock to a two-year deal worth a guaranteed $12 million.
The left-hander, who was reacquired by the Yankees in July in a trade with San Diego, was drafted by the Yankees in 1989 and played for the team from 1992 to '95.
The champion Arizona Diamondbacks re-signed outfielder Danny Bautista, who hit .583 with seven RBI in the World Series, and added Hall of Famer Robin Yount as a coach.
Colorado acquired second baseman Pokey Reese from Cincinnati in a four-player trade that sent left-handed reliever Gabe White to the Reds.
Jay Buhner, the Seattle Mariners' right fielder for 14 years, plans to retire at 37 because of a series of injuries, the Seattle Times reported.
Neither Buhner nor his agent could be reached by the Associated Press.
Buhner had not formally told the team of his decision as of yesterday afternoon, General Manager Pat Gillick said.
Meantime, free agent John Burkett has accepted an $11 million, two-year offer from the Boston Red Sox, his agent said.
The team, however, said it had no news regarding the pitcher.
The Red Sox announced they have agreed to terms with former all-star second baseman Carlos Baerga on a minor league deal and signed pitcher Willie Banks to a major league contract.
Baerga, 33, will be invited to spring training.
In Tallahassee, a federal judge blocked an investigation by Florida's attorney general into baseball's plan to eliminate two teams, saying the inquiry was barred by the sport's antitrust exemption.
The order by U.S. District Judge Robert L. Hinkle frees major league baseball and its two Florida teams from having to give Attorney General Bob Butterworth documents involving plans to fold franchises before the start of next season.
Butterworth was seeking information on those plans, saying Floridians deserve to know if the Florida Marlins and Tampa Bay Devil Rays will be disbanded or moved.
Hinkle said the 1922 U.S. Supreme Court decision exempting baseball from federal antitrust laws extended to state laws.
The Washington Redskins stumbled and bumbled their way out of the NFC East race yesterday, and were left hoping for help elsewhere to keep their flickering playoff aspirations alive.
They failed to help themselves by squandering one opportunity after another and losing to the Philadelphia Eagles, 20-6, in front of 84,936 at FedEx Field.
The Eagles avenged a loss to the Redskins three weeks ago in Philadelphia and increased their lead in the NFC East to three games.
Philadelphia can clinch the title with one more win or a loss by the New York Giants .
Only a loss by the Tampa Bay Buccaneers yesterday -- and the hope that the New Orleans Saints will lose tonight -- kept the Redskins from giving up in the hunt for the final wild-card playoff berth.
They trail the Saints by 1 1/2 games and will play the NFC Central leading Chicago Bears at home next Sunday.
"All we can do is try to win out and roll the dice," linebacker Robert Jones said in the Redskins' somber postgame locker room.
The Redskins had a 6-0 lead early in the second quarter that could have been bigger, but were undone by mistakes.
Brett Conway missed a pair of field goal attempts, the first of which struck an upright.
Punt returner Eric Metcalf had a first-half fumble that led to an Eagles field goal.
By Coach Marty Schottenheimer's count, the Redskins dropped eight passes, and quarterback Tony Banks needed plenty of support.
He threw a pair of costly interceptions to safety Brian Dawkins, one at the Philadelphia 4-yard line and one in the end zone.
"We didn't finish things off," Schottenheimer said.
"When you play a good football team like the Eagles, you have to take advantage of your opportunities.
And we didn't do that. . . .
When you don't get it finished offensively, it's very frustrating.
It's disappointing not to be able to finish off those opportunities."
Said veteran cornerback Darrell Green: "We gave too much.
We were too generous."
The Redskins got 111 rushing yards by tailback Stephen Davis, and their defense limited the Eagles to 63 rushing yards and forced four turnovers.
Defensive end Bruce Smith pressured quarterback Donovan McNabb into an interception and stripped the ball from tailback Duce Staley.
Linebacker LaVar Arrington and Green added interceptions.
The Redskins couldn't cash in, and McNabb led the Eagles to their sixth road triumph in six tries.
McNabb had touchdown passes of four yards to rookie wide receiver Freddie Mitchell in the second quarter and 62 yards to wideout Todd Pinkston in the third quarter.
"He showed poise as a quarterback," Staley said.
"Things didn't start off like we wanted them to, but he hung in there.
He is a leader on the field, and we saw that out there.
He took some hits.
He was banged up a little bit.
But he came back to the huddle and fired us up."
The early signs were ominous for the Redskins.
Eddie Mason committed a holding penalty as the Redskins returned the opening kickoff, and wide receiver Michael Westbrook dropped a screen pass on the game's first offensive play.
Fullback Bryan Johnson had a swing pass from Banks slip off his fingertips on third down as the Redskins went three plays and out on their opening possession.
But the Philadelphia offense also went three plays and out as McNabb made a pair of low throws, and the game settled into a tight, tense struggle.
The Redskins had the first scoring chance when the Eagles' second drive ended with McNabb being hit from behind by Smith as he tried to pass, with the ball wobbling into the hands of defensive tackle Dan Wilkinson for an interception.
The Redskins took over at the Eagles 26.
But rookie wideout Rod Gardner was called for offensive pass interference on the first play, and Banks could get only 11 yards on his third-and-16 scramble.
Enter Conway, who clanked two kicks off the left upright eight days ago at Arizona before connecting on his final two field goal attempts.
This time, his 39-yard try hit the right upright and fell away.
The Eagles again failed to move on offense, and Metcalf scampered up the sideline for a 30-yard punt return.
Davis's 16-yard run gave the Redskins a first down at the Philadelphia 27.
He plowed for seven more yards on first down, and got a yard on a second-down run.
But reserve wide receiver Derrius Thompson shoved cornerback Troy Vincent near the pileup after the play and was called for a 15-yard personal foul.
The Redskins couldn't recover but Conway connected from 47 yards to put them in front, 3-0.
The Redskins had another chance early in the second quarter when Philadelphia cornerback Bobby Taylor missed a tackle on a slant pattern by Gardner, who made the catch and ran 57 yards before being dragged down by Dawkins at the Eagles 7.
But the Redskins couldn't get into the end zone.
Davis was stopped for no gain, Banks threw incomplete for tight end
Walter Rasby and Banks overthrew Gardner on a fade route in the end zone.
Conway's 25-yard field goal made it 6-0.
Philadelphia responded immediately with an 11-play, 66-yard touchdown march.
McNabb gained two yards on a fourth-and-inches sneak, and found tight end Chad Lewis open in the middle of the field for a 25-yard reception.
McNabb's two-yard run on a quarterback draw gave the Eagles a first down at the Redskins 4.
He threw two incompletions to Pinkston, working against rookie cornerback Fred Smoot.
On third down, Mitchell got just a sliver of working room against Green and made a tumbling catch of McNabb's low throw for his first NFL touchdown catch.
The Redskins couldn't move after being backed up by Champ Bailey's illegal block on their kickoff return, and Bryan Barker shanked a 26-yard punt out of bounds.
The Eagles started at the Redskins 36, but McNabb immediately had a pass tipped high into the air by defensive end Marco Coleman.
Arrington grabbed the ball on the carom for the interception.
The Redskins were set to have good field position late in the first half, but Philadelphia's Rashard Cook knocked the ball away from Metcalf and Correll Buckhalter made the recovery for the Eagles at the Washington 44.
Place kicker David Akers's 40-yard field goal increased the Eagles' advantage to 10-6 at the break.
The frustrations continued to mount in the third quarter for the Redskins.
Davis turned a screen pass into a 23-yard gain and a first down at the Philadelphia 37.
But Westbrook and Davis dropped passes, and Conway's 48-yard field goal attempt was wide right and perhaps a bit short.
On the next play, the Eagles faked a screen pass and a reverse, and fooled Smoot.
Pinkston grabbed McNabb's well-placed lob between Smoot and safety David Terrell, and outmaneuvered them to the end zone to complete the 62-yard catch and run.
"I bit down on the reverse, and they got it in there," Smoot said.
Rasby, fellow tight end Zeron Flemister and
wideout Kevin Lockett dropped passes the next time the Redskins had the ball.
Rasby made an acrobatic catch one possession later to give the Redskins a scoring chance, but Banks's throw toward Westbrook was off target and intercepted by Dawkins.
"I didn't play well enough for us to beat this team," said Banks, who completed 17 of 36 passes for 213 yards.
"We had penalties that took us out of scoring position.
We had interceptions that took us out of scoring position.
I just have to do better."
Akers's 49-yard field goal lifted Philadelphia's lead to 20-6 just over 2 1/2 minutes into the fourth quarter, but the Redskins still had a few opportunities to squander.
Green stepped in front of Eagles wide receiver Na Brown for an interception, but that produced only Banks's incompletion on a fourth-and-11 throw toward Gardner from the Eagles 21.
Smith ripped the ball from Staley's hands, and Banks connected with Westbrook for a 27-yard gain to the Eagles 1.
But Banks's throw toward Flemister in the back of the end zone was wild, and Dawkins made a leaping interception.
"Philly played outstanding, but we missed a lot of opportunities," Redskins left tackle Chris Samuels said.
"We made a lot of crucial mistakes, and they killed us."
Republicans sought support Monday from moderate Senate Democrats in a last-gasp attempt at crafting a bipartisan economic stimulus bill.
President Bush worked the telephones while GOP leaders considered putting a new package to a House vote.
With Congress itching to leave town for the year, House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Bill Thomas, R-Calif., was drafting legislation likely to combine GOP tax cuts for individuals and businesses with the Democrats' 13-week extension of unemployment benefits and a tax credit to help jobless people buy health insurance.
That bill, which could reach the House floor by midweek, might draw enough backing from the Senate's Democratic centrists to increase the pressure on Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D., to schedule a vote.
An earlier $100 million House GOP package consisting mostly of tax cuts was never put to a vote in the Senate and a Democratic bill heavier on government spending was blocked by Republicans.
After meeting Monday with Thomas, Sen. John Breaux of Louisiana, a leader of the Democratic moderates, said he would discuss the House proposal with other centrists to determine if enough votes exist to overcome a 60-vote procedural hurdle and pass the bill.
There are 50 Democrats, 49 Republicans and one independent who caucuses with the Democrats in the Senate.
House GOP leaders, Breaux said, don't want "to do something they don't think can pass the Senate.
I would just hope there has to be a way we can reach an agreement."
Putting a second economic stimulus bill on the House floor would also give Republicans a chance to vote for more generous unemployment benefits than those in the measure passed in October.
Democrats have repeatedly criticized that bill as a tax giveaway to wealthy individuals and multinational corporations and said the GOP was ignoring the plight of the unemployed.
White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said Bush has talked extensively in recent days to Senate moderates, including Breaux, in hopes of patching together sufficient support for Congress to pass a compromise bill.
The Bush administration, which has been pushing for an economic stimulus package since shortly after the Sept. 11 terror attacks, continued to lay blame for the stalemate at the doorstep of the Democrat-led Senate.
"Obviously, the Senate is on a slow path, a slow track to stimulating the economy, and the president would like to help the Senate," Fleischer said.
Thomas said the main obstacle was Democratic insistence that increased health insurance assistance be based on existing COBRA coverage available to some, but not all, laid-off workers.
Republicans want a tax credit that would be available upfront to the unemployed and could be used to help pay for a wider range of health plans.
Senate Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus, however, said the GOP proposal would be "chaotic" and would be difficult to put in place in time to help unemployed people.
Baucus said Democrats had come a long way in supporting GOP income tax cuts.
"It gives Democrats heartburn, ulcers.
And they are willing to take the ulcers and the heartburn if they get the benefits," said Baucus, D-Mont.
Details of a second House bill were still being worked out Monday.
Several sources said key parts would resemble a proposal floated by Bush last week that was endorsed by Breaux and other Democratic centrists.
That measure included a new round of rebate checks aimed at lower-income workers and would cut the 27 percent income tax rate to 25 percent in 2002 rather than phasing the reduction in over several years.
There are also tax breaks for large and small businesses, including 30 percent immediate depreciation write-offs over the next three years.
The NFL is taking a hard stand against fan violence after a second ugly display marred a game.
One day after a game in Cleveland was interrupted when fans threw objects, including partially filled plastic beer bottles, onto the field, the same thing happened in New Orleans.
Both times, the fans were unhappy with officials' calls.
"We are not going to tolerate objects being thrown from the stands," said NFL spokesman Greg Aiello.
"We will work with our clubs to review all aspects of these incidents and take whatever steps are necessary to prevent them from happening again."
Fans in the corner of one end zone of the Superdome reacted Monday night after officials flagged Saints cornerback Kevin Mathis for pass interference against the Rams' Torry Holt.
The call late in the fourth quarter of New Orleans' 34-21 loss sparked a brief demonstration that left one side of the end zone littered with debris.
The outburst, which lasted less than 30 seconds, came a day after fans in Cleveland threw bottles and other debris to protest the overturning by instant replay of a game-deciding call.
"I think we agree that this really was what you call a copycat incident after what happened in Cleveland," said Superdome general manager Doug Thornton.
Fifteen people in the Superdome were arrested for disturbing the peace, public drunkenness and battery all misdemeanors that carry $500 in fines or six months in jail, said New Orleans police department spokesman Joe Narcisse.
Another four were served summonses and 11 others were ejected from the building.
Thornton said Superdome officials will urge the district attorney's office to prosecute those charged with crimes.
He said they would also talk to the Saints about permanently revoking season tickets from holders involved in such events.
And Saints manager of ticket sales and services Michael Stanfield agreed: "We would revoke somebody's tickets immediately if they were caught taking part in such an incident.
"
Items thrown on the field included plastic beer bottles, plastic water bottles, cups, ice even a pair of binoculars.
Stadium sales of beer in plastic bottles began several years ago, Thornton said.
They are popular with fans because the plastic bottles are easier to carry than cups and they eliminate foam in draft beer.
They are popular with stadiums because they are faster to serve and cut down the length of concession lines.
Eliminating the bottles would cut the profit for teams and stadiums, Thornton said.
However, he added: "Our decision to eliminate the bottles should not be affected by the loss of income.
That's not going to be a consideration."
The Superdome had extra security officers, including state and city police, on duty for Monday night's game.
Dome officials halted beer sales by vendors in the stands after halftime and stopped all beer sales at the beginning of the fourth quarter.
The outburst took place in the plaza seating area closest to the field, where many season ticket holders sit.
The area was particularly crowded because the Saints sold 1,700 standing room tickets.
The Saints are reviewing the decision on standing room tickets.
Night games, when fans may have begun drinking before arriving at the stadium, traditionally cause more problems than day games, Thornton said.
The Saints played a Sunday night game against the New York Jets on Nov. 4.
That night, 32 people were arrested, largely as a result of fights between Jets and Saints fans.
Milt Ahlerich, the NFL's director of security, remained in town on Tuesday and met with Superdome officials most of the morning.
Ahlerich has spent considerable time here the past month setting up heavy security for the Super Bowl, which will be played in the Superdome on Feb. 3.
Thornton said he would consult league officials on solutions that might include bans on plastic containers and penalties for season ticket holders.
House and Senate negotiators agreed yesterday to shift nearly $4 billion that President Bush wanted for military spending to pay instead for homeland security and efforts to help communities, including those in the Washington area, recover from the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
The compromise $20 billion anti-terrorism package resulted from an intense struggle between the White House and congressional Democrats over how much should be spent on domestic anti-terrorism activities.
Earlier, Bush fended off efforts by Democrats in both houses to add $15 billion more to the anti-terrorism package, which would have forced the president to back off the spending ceilings he had set for the year.
As a result, Democrats were forced to focus their efforts on shuffling money within the $20 billion, and here they did better getting funding for homeland security.
In dividing up the $20 billion, Democrats succeeded in cutting Bush's defense spending request to $3.5 billion from $7.3 billion.
The remaining $16.5 billion was split roughly evenly between security precautions, including bioterrorism programs, and payments to New York and Washington, the targets of the September attacks.
Bush had requested $4.4 billion for domestic security and $6.3 billion for the affected communities, contending that this was all that could be spent before he submits proposals of his own next year.
Democrats had argued it was risky to shortchange anti-terrorism efforts in light of continuing dangers.
Even though the Pentagon didn't get all it wanted, it received a $42 billion increase, the largest one-year increase in more than two decades, according to Senate Appropriations Committee Chairman Robert C. Byrd (D-W.Va.).
"This package is a compromise," Byrd said.
"It does not provide all of the funding that is needed for homeland defense, local recovery initiatives or the military effort.
At the same time, it does not shortchange any of these priorities.
It takes solid steps toward accomplishing all of these goals."
The Pentagon is likely to get further appropriations from Congress, as needed, to fight the war in Afghanistan, lawmakers have said.
Approval of the anti-terrorism package and the $318 billion defense appropriations bill for this year, to which it was attached, appears to clear the way for final action on spending bills for the fiscal year that began Oct. 1.
Also nearing final approval are spending bills for foreign aid and for health, education and other social programs.
Congressional leaders are scheduling all three bills for House and Senate votes later this week, hoping to wind up the 2001 session by this weekend.
The defense spending measure includes a pay raise of at least 5 percent for military personnel.
Washington Post reporter Steve Vogel covers local and regional military issues.
His Military Matters column runs every other week.
Israeli troops swept into a Palestinian town in the Gaza Strip before dawn today, bulldozing houses and police outposts, killing two police officers and two youths and arresting suspected militants before withdrawing after darkness fell. 
A fifth Palestinian was killed today by Israeli troops in the southern Gaza Strip when he tried to enter a Jewish settlement to carry out a grenade attack, the army said.
Palestinians reported 13 people were killed and scores injured during two straight days of lightning raids by Israeli armored forces and infantry.
Israeli officials said the sweeps would continue as long as Yasser Arafat's Palestinian Authority refused to quash terrorist groups.
Palestinians said the Israeli attacks, which have targeted Arafat's police and security forces, have made it impossible to crack down on hard-line Islamic groups that have conducted terrorist attacks against Israelis.
As the violence surged, the State Department announced that U.S. envoy Anthony C. Zinni, who failed in nearly three weeks of mediation to nudge the two sides toward a cease-fire, would return to Washington for consultations.
Although it was expected, the decision to suspend Zinni's mission was an acknowledgment that the Bush administration's first serious push to end the bloodshed between Israelis and Palestinians had reached a dead end, at least for the time being.
Zinni's 20 days in the region coincided with one of the worst eruptions of violence in nearly 15 months of fighting.
Since the retired Marine Corps general arrived Nov. 26, several dozen Israelis have been killed in a string of Palestinian suicide bombings and other attacks, and almost as many Palestinians have died in Israeli reprisal raids.
The worst fighting today took place in Beit Hanoun, a town of about 20,000 people near the Gaza Strip's northern border with Israel.
Israel described Beit Hanoun as a hotbed of Palestinian terrorism, and said militants there had fired mortars and rockets at nearby Jewish communities in Gaza and beyond the border fence inside Israel.
Israeli forces rumbled into the town in convoys of tanks and armored fighting vehicles.
Witnesses said Palestinian youths threw stones at the advancing Israeli forces and set tires ablaze.
Before long, the clashes escalated into gunfights between Palestinian security forces and Israeli troops.
Four Palestinians were killed by Israeli gunfire, including two police officers and two boys, ages 12 and 16, according to Shifa Hospital in nearby Gaza City.
Fifty Palestinians were injured in today's fighting, the hospital said.
The Israeli army said 15 Palestinians were arrested.
Palestinians said the Israelis bulldozed five houses, three security offices and a headquarters of Arafat's Fatah movement.
One of the houses belonged to Salah Shahed, the founder of the armed wing of the militant group Hamas, but witnesses said he was not in the area at the time.
Israeli forces moved onto the grounds of the Beit Hanoun Secondary Girls' School, briefly putting up tents in the yard and raising an Israeli flag atop one building, witnesses said.
"We did not carry out this operation thinking it will put a complete stop to terror, but it definitely damaged the effectiveness," said Brig.
Gen. Israel Ziv, the Israeli commander for Gaza.
He said if the Palestinian Authority did not wage a concerted war against terrorism, "we will have no choice but to continue these operations."
Fla.
An American and two Russians returned from their four-month space station mission with "smiles on their faces" and a bounce in their steps, despite all the changes in the world around them.
"We're very grateful to be home for Christmas," astronaut Frank Culbertson said shortly after space shuttle Endeavour brought him back to Earth amid heightened security on Monday.
Culbertson and his international space station crewmates walked off Endeavour, ending an expedition that began in August and persevered through one of America's darkest days.
"To be able to walk off on your own two feet is a testament to what those guys did on orbit on their exercise program and their determination to come back in great shape," said shuttle commander Dominic Gorie.
Culbertson and cosmonauts Vladimir Dezhurov and Mikhail Tyurin were aboard the international space station on Sept. 11 and watched the horrifying smoky scenes from 250 miles up.
The space station's cameras captured images of the World Trade Center that were relayed by NASA to news agencies around the world.
A retired 52-year-old Navy captain, Culbertson expressed frustration and feelings of isolation in the days after Sept. 11.
Over the weekend, he said: "It was a very difficult day to try to understand and realize what really was going on and the magnitude of the tragedy involved.
You think: How could somebody do something like this and what happens next?"
As a high-flying show of patriotism, Endeavour carried more than 6,000 American flags to the space station and back.
The flags will be mounted on certificates and distributed to families of those killed on Sept. 11, as well as to some survivors of the tragedy.
Gorie said he hoped Endeavour's flight was a source of strength for those who suffered "and I think we all have suffered in some respects since Sept. 11.
"
"I have to think that every person who was here and watched the shuttle take off anytime, ever has to feel a sense of pride and strength and certainly patriotism if they are an American," he said.
"That has to have some curing effect on our psyche, individually and nationally."
Only about 100 guests lined the runway for Endeavour's afternoon return, namely family members and top NASA officials.
The crowd was one-tenth the usual size because of stepped-up security; most Kennedy Space Center employees were turned away.
The shuttle's launch 12 days earlier also was surrounded by heavy security to guard against a terrorist attack.
Culbertson was welcomed back to the planet by his wife, Rebecca, and five children.
The cosmonauts' wives also were present for the homecoming.
All three men had "smiles on their faces," Gorie said.
Culbertson, Dezhurov and Tyurin spent 129 days in orbit, circled Earth more than 2,000 times and logged 53 million miles more than half the distance between the Earth and the sun.
They face weeks of rehabilitation to strengthen their space-weakened bones and muscles.
Replacing them at the space station were Russian cosmonaut Yuri Onufrienko, the new commander, and American astronauts Daniel Bursch and Carl Walz.
They will stay on board until Endeavour returns for them in May.
After a nearly year-long struggle, the Senate today gave final congressional approval to a far-reaching plan to use federal education aid as leverage to force improvements in low-performing schools and to assure more help for needy students.
The measure, approved by a vote of 87 to 10, was overwhelmingly approved by the House last week and now goes to President Bush, who made it one of the top priorities for his first year in office and plans to sign it early next year.
White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said the president was "just delighted" with the bill.
The legislation, probably the most ambitious education reform effort since passage of the landmark Elementary and Secondary Education Act in 1965, will require testing of every student in grades three through eight in reading and mathematics.
Poorly performing schools would get extra aid to help them improve, but continued failure would invite sanctions, such as conversion to charter school.
Children in lagging schools would get federal aid for tutoring, summer school programs or transportation to another public school.
The bill aims to close the achievement gap experienced by many poor and minority students, have all children reading by the third grade and to put a qualified teacher in every classroom.
Local school districts would have greater flexibility in spending federal aid.
The bill was the product of intense bipartisan cooperation that is rare for such a major piece of legislation.
It is one of the few big domestic bills not related to terrorism that kept moving in Congress after the Sept. 11 attacks.
Although the bill did not include Bush's proposal for vouchers to help children in failing public schools pay tuition at private schools, it gave the president most of what he wanted, and many Democrats came away happy too.
"The legislation before us today is about America's future," said Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee Chairman Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.)
as today's debate began.
"It is about enabling all children to fulfill their dreams and to build a future for themselves, their families, their communities and our country."
But some lawmakers, including Sen. James M. Jeffords (I-Vt.), Kennedy's predecessor as chairman of the panel, faulted Congress for demanding more of schools than it is willing to pay to improve them.
He had never voted against an education bill in his 25 years in Congress but would do so this time, Jeffords said.
"I fear that this bill, without the sufficient resources, will merely highlight our shortcomings. .?.?.
I believe it is better to approve no bill rather than to approve a bad bill," he said.
Space shuttle Endeavour undocked from the international space station today, bringing home three men who had lived on the orbiting outpost since summer.
Before leaving, astronaut Frank Culbertson gave the new space station residents candy canes and a small fabric Christmas tree decorated with gifts for every day until Dec. 25, intended as a holiday countdown.
"It's been a great ride, a great trip, and it's now time to say goodbye," said Culbertson, who served as the space station's skipper for four months.
The retired Navy captain saluted Russian Yuri Onufrienko, his successor, then floated out of the station and into the shuttle for his ride home.
Astronaut Daniel Bursch, a Navy officer left behind, rang the ship's bell and called out in naval fashion: "
Expedition Three, departing."
Onufrienko, Bursch and astronaut Carl Walz make up Expedition Four, the fourth team to live on the space station.
They will spend almost six months in orbit, returning to Earth in May on the same shuttle that brought them up.
"We feel like we've accomplished a lot.
We feel our mission has been successful," Culbertson noted in a farewell ceremony.
If Endeavour lands Monday as planned, Culbertson and Russians Mikhail Tyurin and Vladimir Dezhurov will have spent 129 days in orbit.
They moved into the space station in August.
Endeavour pulled away as the spacecraft soared 250 miles above Australia.
Its departure was delayed so the shuttle could move the orbiting complex away from space junk.
A large chunk of a 30-year-old Russian rocket was supposed to pass within three miles of the space station on Sunday -- uncomfortably close.
NASA had the shuttle pilots steer the station into a slightly higher orbit, creating a gap of more than 40 miles between the outpost and the piece of debris.
The extra fuel used in the evasive action forced the shuttle astronauts to shorten their fly-around of the station for a photo survey.
Before Endeavour moved out of sight, shuttle commander Dominic Gorie called out to the space station inhabitants, "Fair winds and following seas, my friends."
"We'll miss all of you and, hopefully, it will seem like yesterday when we get home," Bursch replied.
Endeavour spent eight days at the space station.
The shuttle crew dropped off thousands of pounds of supplies and loaded the cargo carrier with thousands of pounds of trash and old equipment for return to Earth.
Now What? 
collapse of the last organized resistance by al Qaeda in Afghanistan's White Mountains, the war against terrorism has reached a turning point.
The possibilities for conventional military operations against the terrorists and their hosts have been all but exhausted, at least in Afghanistan.
Afghan opposition forces have declared victory over both al Qaeda and the Taliban regime, and are preparing to install a new government this weekend.
Apart from a few isolated pockets of resistance, there are few targets left for U.S. bombing.
Secretary of State Colin Powell says that "we've destroyed al Qaeda in Afghanistan, and we have ended the role of Afghanistan as a haven for terrorist activity."
And yet, Osama bin Laden and Mohammad Omar remain at large, as do the great majority of other al Qaeda and Taliban leaders.
That means that the war -- even this first phase of the war -- cannot be over; instead, it now may have to be fought by different, and more complicated, means.
As successful as the U.S. military campaign has been, its limits also are now apparent.
President Bush has stressed from the beginning that the United States is not at war with Afghanistan or its people but with the terrorists; consequently, the capture of the country by U.S.-allied forces, and even the elimination of the Taliban and al Qaeda resistance, means less than it would in a conventional conflict.
As Mr. Powell pointed out, Afghanistan's place as a site for the open training and basing of terrorists has been eliminated.
But as long as the leadership of al Qaeda survives, it may be able to organize and order attacks on the United States by the cells it has dispersed around the world; and as long as the Taliban's top leadership remains at large, the U.S. vow to hold sponsors of terrorism accountable will remain unfulfilled, and the possibility of a comeback by the extremists will remain.
The Afghan practice of negotiating the surrender of Taliban commanders, rather than crushing them not only has left many senior officials at large but also has given the new government a stake in protecting them from U.S. retribution.
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld rightly stressed yesterday that the Afghan campaign remains far from over.
"There are still a lot of Taliban" and al Qaeda in the country, he said, "and it's going to take time and energy and effort, and people will be killed in the process of trying to find them and capture them or have them surrender.
" Careful diplomacy also will be needed, both with the new Afghan authorities and with the government of Pakistan, where many of the terrorists may be hiding.
The United States must persuade its new Afghan allies to move against Mohammad Omar and other senior Taliban leaders, or allow U.S. forces to act -- even if it disrupts the fragile truce arrangements or the effort to deploy an international peacekeeping force under British command.
Similarly, Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf must be encouraged to take the next step in his journey toward alliance with the West by cracking down hard on any Taliban or al Qaeda forces that have slipped into his country -- even though that may offend elements in the armed forces that remain sympathetic to the Taliban.
The next few weeks may determine whether the al Qaeda forces now on the run will be able to reestablish themselves, perhaps clandestinely, as a presence in Afghanistan, Pakistan or somewhere else.
Even if it means offending allies both old and new, the United States must act aggressively to prevent that from happening.
Now I understand why Art Modell won't return to Cleveland.
We shouldn't paint with a stroke so broad it colors everybody who attended Sunday's Browns-Jaguars game.
But visual and anecdotal evidence suggest rather strongly that thousands inside the stadium acted like idiots and participated in some of the ugliest behavior the NFL has seen in a long time.
It was frightening to watch players, security folks and referees being pelted with plastic beer bottles, cups of soda, trash and who knows what else in the final minute of Sunday's game, all because a call didn't go Cleveland's way.
It doesn't matter that the beer bottles were plastic or that most of them were empty by the time they were tossed from the stands.
Even one of the Browns' players, safety Earl Little, said, "It was crazy.
Some of those bottles were loaded."
Jacksonville's Jimmy Smith said, "We were just trying to dodge as many beer bottles as we could.
It felt like I was starring in 'Saving Private Ryan' or something."
Okay, so Smith got a little carried away.
His overstatement, though, was nowhere near as offensive as Browns owner Al Lerner and team president Carmen Policy reacting to the mayhem as if it were a high school cafeteria food fight.
Six people were arrested.
At least one person was injured seriously enough to require treatment.
And far more people could have been injured by debris being thrown from a height equal to four stories.
Policy, one of the league's most respected executives for more than 20 years, seemed to have lost his perspective when he spoke at a news conference after the game. "
The bottles are plastic," Policy said.
"They don't carry much of a wallop."
He didn't stop there.
"Cleveland is not going to take a black eye," he said.
"Our fans had their hearts ripped out."
Want more?
"I like the fact that our fans cared."
At least Policy did a bit of moon-walking yesterday afternoon, apologizing and saying of his Sunday comments, "I didn't set the proper tone . . .
I didn't get the job done."
Thankfully, he did call the participants "hooligans" and set a much more appropriate tone.
Still, Policy stopped short of totally condemning the guilty parties, which you would think should be in order since the people throwing projectiles were guilty of criminal behavior.
Cleveland's image should be a secondary concern to making certain this never happens again.
The problem in Cleveland starts at the top, with the owner.
Lerner had the nerve to say, "Everybody controlled themselves considering that they had spent 60 minutes in cold weather," he said.
It's a wonder then how anybody in Alaska walks around without wearing a helmet and flak jacket.
"It wasn't pleasant," Lerner said.
"I'm not going to suggest anything like that.
But it wasn't World War III."
So anything short of a riot is excused if it happens in Cleveland Browns Stadium?
When some New York Giants fans threw snowballs from the stands onto the field a few years ago, owner Wellington Mara was quick to pursue the guilty parties.
Mara was one of the owners who expressed surprise yesterday at how docile Browns management was in the face of something so ugly.
I'd be remiss if I didn't assign some of the blame for this acting out to the TV networks and newspaper columnists who pay anything more than passing attention to places like "The Dawg Pound" in Cleveland and "The Black Hole" in Oakland.
As often as not, these are sections of a stadium where people get painted up, dressed up, and too often lathered up.
If the TV cameras show a fan often enough, he begins to think he's important, that his ability to look ridiculous somehow helps his team and distinguishes him, marks him as "caring enough" about his team.
This issue is far more important than whether players wear their socks the recommended height, though I wonder if the NFL agrees.
Luckily, this column can jump to a more upbeat note, even as it pertains to professional football.
Darrell Green has officially changed his mind and will endeavor to play one more season with the Redskins, which is how it should have been in the first place.
He's making open-field tackles, covering receivers and on Sunday intercepted a pass for the 19th consecutive season, a league record.
Cornerbacks who can cover are like left-handed starters -- hard to find.
If he can play next August like he is playing now, there ought to be a roster spot for him.
And if it's easier to raise funds as Darrell Green of the Washington Redskins than it is as Darrell Green formerly of the Washington Redskins, then even more good will be served.
We presume, however, that Green won't still be playing if and when the Super Bowl comes to Washington or New York in 2007.
If the tragedies and suffering of Sept. 11 are indeed the impetus for bringing the biggest event in American sports to either city, I applaud Commissioner Paul Tagliabue.
But why not do both?
Why not New York one year, D.C. another?
And it doesn't have to involve playing between snowflakes.
By 2005, the Olympic host for the 2012 Summer Games will be named.
If it's Washington, which is very much in the running, we'll almost certainly end up with a new mega-stadium on the site now occupied by RFK Stadium.
Mayors Anthony A. Williams of Washington and Martin O'Malley of Baltimore have said as much, on the record, during a conversation I had with them in Sydney last October.
How easy would it then be to put a Super Bowl in a shiny new domed stadium in the nation's capital?
Gaza Strip Yasser Arafat closed six Hamas offices in a crackdown on militant groups Tuesday amid opposition over his call to end attacks against the Jewish state.
Israel, meanwhile, rounded up 10 Palestinians in the Gaza Strip.
A new poll showed more than half the Palestinians opposed a halt to the fighting.
On Monday, Hamas, Islamic Jihad and Popular Front said that they would not abide by Arafat's cease-fire order.
Israeli leaders remained skeptical of Arafat's intentions.
Defense Minister Binyamin Ben-Eliezer said attacks were continuing.
"We are not seeing a real effort against the ... terror infrastructure," he said.
Israel's military chief of staff, Lt. Gen. Shaul Mofaz, said a string of bloody Palestinian attacks has led to "delegitimization of Arafat ... something that allows us today greater freedom of action."
Israeli forces arrested 10 Palestinians in two incidents in the Gaza Strip Tuesday, following sweeps earlier this week in the West Bank.
Arafat has said his security forces have detained 180 militants, but Israel charges that no leaders have been picked up.
Gaza security chief Mohammed Dahlan said Tuesday that the Palestinian Authority, headed by Arafat, would not tolerate independent action by the militants.
"We will arrest anyone who violates Authority decisions," he told The Associated Press. "
And we will prevent firing of mortar shells by force."
Mortar shells strike Jewish settlements and army outposts in Gaza almost daily, usually causing little danger, but prompting Israeli reprisals.
Late Tuesday, Palestinian police closed six Hamas offices in Gaza, part of Arafat's announced crackdown on the militant group that has claimed responsibility for many bomb attacks in Israel.
The offices were centers for youth, political and social activities.
Arafat has been virtually trapped in his West Bank headquarters in the town of Ramallah since last week, when Israel responded to a bus attack that killed 10 by destroying his helicopters and tightening a cordon around Palestinian towns.
Secretary of State Colin Powell phoned Arafat Tuesday, said Nabil Abu Rdeneh, an Arafat aide.
He said Arafat appealed to Powell to press Israel to end its siege on Palestinian territories and stop killing suspected militants.
Powell told Arafat that he has taken some positive actions, but "those actions need to be completed" to stop violence, State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said.
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon told Powell in a call that Arafat is still "giving the green light for terrorism," according to a statement from Sharon's office.
Sharon said in the call from Powell that in the 48 hours since Arafat's cease-fire call, there have been 31 terror attacks, including gunfire, mortar attacks and bombings, and four Israelis were hurt.
In a Sunday speech, Arafat called for an end to attacks against Israel, including suicide bomb attacks, referring to then as "terrorist activity" for the first time.
He charged that Israel had declared war on the Palestinians and called for an end to attacks to deprive Israel of an excuse to keep up its offensive.
But a poll published Tuesday said a majority of the Palestinians responding favor suicide bombings against Israelis and oppose a truce.
The poll by the independent Jerusalem Media and Communications Center, showed that 57.6 percent of the Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza feel a "cease-fire is unjustified in the current circumstances."
Only 34.9 percent felt a truce was justified, and 7.5 percent had no opinion.
Also, 64 percent backed suicide bomb attacks.
The poll conducted Dec. 6-9, before Arafat's speech involved interviews with 1,201 Palestinians and had a margin of error of plus or minus 3 percentage points.
A Hamas statement rejecting the cease-fire call said suicide bombings are "the only weapon to preserve Palestinian rights."
Fla., Dec. 17 ?
The shuttle Endeavour streaked back to Earth today, bringing three space station astronauts home to a very different, post-Sept.
11 world after four months in the weightlessness of space.
Flying upside down and backward over the southern Indian Ocean, shuttle skipper Dominic Gorie and pilot Mark Kelly fired Endeavour's twin braking rockets at 11:48 a.m. to begin the hour-long glide to the Kennedy Space Center.
Dropping like a stone through puffy white clouds, Endeavour settled to a tire-smoking touchdown on runway 15 at 12:55 p.m. to close out a 12-day voyage spanning 4.9 million miles and 185 complete orbits since blastoff Dec. 5 from nearby launch pad 39B.Space station commander Frank Culbertson and his two Expedition 3 crewmates, Russian cosmonauts Vladimir Dezhurov and Mikhail Tyurin, endured the uncomfortable onset of gravity resting on their backs in recumbent seats mounted on the shuttle's lower deck.
U.S. and Russian flight surgeons were standing by to help the station fliers off the shuttle as required and to monitor their initial re-adaptation to gravity after 129 days aloft.
For his part, Culbertson sounded healthy and in good spirits in a brief radio call to flight controllers at the Johnson Space Center in Houston.
"To everyone who helped make this mission possible and bring us home, thanks very much, we're very grateful to be home for Christmas," Culbertson radioed.
"We're really grateful for all the great work everybody did."
"Frank, those are great words, we'll pass 'em on and welcome back to Earth," astronaut James Kelly replied from mission control.
"We're happy to have you back."
Following medical exams and reunions with family members, Culbertson, Dezhurov and Tyurin will enjoy their first hot showers since launch Aug. 10 and a chance to enjoy food and drink not available in space.
For Culbertson, that meant ice cream.
For Tyurin, "a big glass of cold beer would be fine."
"Living in space had always been a goal of mine and we had the opportunity to do it and it was a great experience," Culbertson said Sunday.
"We felt like we accomplished a lot and as Mikhail has said, this may end up being one of the most significant parts of our lives.
"So it's sad when something like that comes to an end.
But of course, we've got a lot of good things ahead of us and we'll be very, very happy to see all our family and friends."
The station crew will remain in Florida Tuesday and then fly back to the Johnson Space Center in Houston on Wednesday.
Following NASA protocols, Culbertson will be allowed to continue his supervised readaptation at home while the Russians will check into crew quarters at the Johnson Space Center.
Dezhurov and Tyurin plan to fly back to Moscow around the end of the month.
But first, the Expedition 3 crew faces an intense week of "biomedical and research activity and, most important, rehab," said flight surgeon Stephen Hart.
"And we'll be doing that to build up gradually the strength and flexibility and balance skills that have basically been on vacation the past four months.
"The first week of that period is really the steepest part of the curve, but thereafter things are really pretty much back to normal," he said.
That's from the perspective of around-the-clock supervision.
It typically takes returning station astronauts as much time on Earth as they spent in space to fully recover from the effects of prolonged weightlessness.
The primary goal of the 107th shuttle mission was to deliver a fresh crew to the International Space Station, along with three tons of equipment and supplies.
Endeavour docked with the station Dec. 7 and expedition 4 commander Yury Onufrienko, Daniel Bursch and Carl Walz replaced Culbertson and his crewmates the next day.
The ISS-4 crew plans to remain aboard the outpost for nearly six months, returning to Earth next May.
Maybe Tony Banks should have taken the money while it was on the table.
Put in a position where he had to throw the ball accurately with the game on the line, he couldn't.
The defense wasn't perfect, but it did produce four turnovers.
You play a bitter rival at home, in a fight for a spot in the playoffs, with the aid of four turnovers -- two of them in the final eight minutes -- you're supposed to win.
Every time you figure the Redskins can't win, they do, and every time they have a chance to make something of their season, they don't.
Even in a league that's difficult to figure, the Redskins are maddening.
Schottenheimer was his usual calm self, outwardly, after yesterday's loss.
But the bet here is Game 13 must have frustrated him more than any other.
He must have used the phrase "very frustrated" or some slight variation a half-dozen times, and who could blame him?
He complimented his players, saying they "fought their tails off to the bitter end."
But he added, "and it is indeed a bitter end." 
The Redskins' chance to win the NFC East ended with their seventh loss; the Eagles have four and only three games remain.
A chance to gain ground on Tampa Bay, Atlanta, and maybe New Orleans in the wild-card chase didn't end, but it hit a giant speed bump.
If the Redskins can't beat the sorry Cowboys at home and the good-but-not-great Eagles at home with everything on the line, why should we believe they'll do anything different against the Bears next Sunday, or the Saints the week after that?
Actually, the way the Redskins have played this season, they will beat the Bears and Saints, then come home and lose to the Cardinals.
The Redskins should have been up 13-0 in this game, should have taken control of it early after that tag-team combo defensive play, Bruce Smith's pass rush and hit that caused a popup that Big Daddy intercepted.
Problem was, Brett Conway missed a 39-yard field goal.
That made three "doinks" off the goal post in five kicks.
You couldn't hit the post three times in five if you tried it 50 times from 10 yards out.
The Redskins should have scored after Darrell Green's historic interception deep in Philly territory, on a fourth-quarter throw that never should have been made.
They should have scored following Smith's takeaway, when he wrestled the ball from Duce Staley a few minutes later.
Okay, I know, the Eagles had only allowed two touchdowns on the road all season coming into Sunday's game.
And on the road, where the Eagles are 6-0, they've allowed 3, 9, 7, 3, 10 and 6 points.
That's absurd. "
Two touchdowns in seven games, I don't care where you're playing, that's remarkable," Schottenheimer said.
And 13 offensive touchdowns in 16 games, no matter whom you're playing against, is puny.
Schottenheimer's conservative offense can work -- it has worked -- if the kicker makes his field-goal tries, if receivers and backs catch passes that hit them in the hands, if the quarterback doesn't make bad decisions and throws, like the ones made by Banks, who recently turned down the team's contract overtures.
You don't have to throw the ball all over the yard to win these games.
"We had chances to take control of the game, and later to change the momentum of the game, and we didn't," right guard Ben Coleman said.
"If we're ahead 13-0 we could have changed their approach, maybe even their game plan.
At 13-0, Donovan McNabb has to beat you with his arm.
The defense gave us the ball four times, two of them late and in great field position, and we didn't do what we're supposed to do.
We didn't convert [third downs], we didn't take advantage of turnovers from point-blank range.
We had a plethora of opportunities . . .
When we watch the film tomorrow, we're going to be sick."
Yes they will be, and not only because they lost a big football game but because losses at this season are compounded with time running out and playoff spots being claimed.
Is the season over?
Amazingly, no, it isn't.
Even though the Redskins are an unimpressive 6-7, Tampa Bay and Atlanta are only 7-6.
And if the Saints lose to the Rams tonight, New Orleans will be 7-6.
That's one game.
Tampa Bay has to play the Saints next week, and the Ravens and Eagles.
The Falcons have the Bills at home, but Miami on the road, and Carolina at home.
The Saints (after the Rams) have to play at Tampa Bay and at home against the Redskins.
The problem, however, is that the two times the Redskins played games reasonable folks expected them to win (against the Cowboys and Eagles), they lost. 
Until they prove differently, perhaps we simply have to assume that the playoffs are a completely inappropriate subject for the Washington Redskins.
Genetic fingerprinting studies indicate that the anthrax spores mailed to Capitol Hill are identical to stocks of the deadly bacteria maintained by the U.S. Army since 1980, according to scientists familiar with the most recent tests.
Although many laboratories possess the Ames strain of anthrax involved in this fall's bioterrorist attacks, only five laboratories so far have been found to have spores with perfect genetic matches to those in the Senate letters, the scientists said.
And all those labs can trace back their samples to a single U.S. military source: the U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Disease (USAMRIID) at Fort Detrick, Md.
"That means the original source [of the terrorist material] had to have been USAMRIID," said one of the scientists.
Those matching samples are at Fort Detrick; the Dugway Proving Ground military research facility in Utah; a British military lab called Porton Down; and microbial depositories at Louisiana State University (LSU) and Northern Arizona University.
Northern Arizona University received its sample from LSU, which received its sample from Porton Down.
Dugway and Porton
Down got their samples directly from USAMRIID.
In another development yesterday, government health officials said they planned to recommend that about 3,000 people who were exposed to anthrax, including hundreds of Washington postal and Capitol Hill workers, be offered an experimental vaccine as a precaution in case antibiotic treatment alone failed to protect them from getting sick.
The FBI's investigation into the anthrax attacks is increasingly focusing on whether U.S. government bioweapons research programs, including one conducted by the CIA, may have been the source of deadly anthrax powder sent through the mail, according to sources with knowledge of the probe.
The results of the genetic tests strengthen that possibility.
The FBI is focusing on a contractor that worked with the CIA, one source said.
But it remains unknown which lab may have lost control of the material that apparently ended up in terrorist hands.
One of the two scientists familiar with the genetic testing, who has been advising the government on the anthrax scare, said investigators still know little about security at Porton Down, though they have no reason to suppose it has been inadequate.
Of the domestic labs, Dugway has attracted the most attention from the FBI, he said.
Dugway is also the only facility known in recent years to have processed anthrax spores into the powdery form that is most easily inhaled.
Scientists have known for some time that bacteria used in the terrorist attacks belong to the Ames strain, a variant of the anthrax bacterium, Bacillus anthracis , that was first isolated from a cow in Iowa and has been under study by military scientists for decades.
But the Ames strain comes in various subtypes that can be distinguished from one another by detailed tests on the microbe's genes.
The genetic fingerprinting finding was made by a research team led by geneticist Paul Keim at Northern Arizona University in Flagstaff, which has been comparing the Ames strain bacteria found in the Senate letters to other Ames strain samples retrieved from nature and from various university and government laboratories.
"That's good detective work in the sense of determining the origins; this will narrow the search for the people who had access to the strain," said Jennie Hunter-Cevera, a microbiologist and president of the University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute.
Other experts were cautious, noting that it is possible that the exact subtype of the Ames strain could have originated elsewhere -- perhaps even isolated from animals or soil in the wild.
"It's an important finding but it's not one of those things that says, 'Aha!'
" said Richard Spertzel, a former director of the U.N. biological weapons team in Iraq.
The scientists are still planning to do genetic testing on anthrax bacteria from the Defense Research Establishment Suffield, a Canadian military research facility, the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque, and the Battelle Memorial Institute in Columbus, Ohio, a government contractor doing research on anthrax vaccines.
Those are the only other facilities known to have received samples from USAMRIID.
The researchers also plan to test samples obtained from nature, and from other university labs known to have the Ames strain to see if any others match.
But of the few such samples that have been tested so far none has matched the spores used by the terrorists.
In addition, the researchers want to examine other characteristics of the samples, such as proteins, carbohydrates and other substances in the material.
"If there's also a telltale piece or trace of nutrients or chemicals that show the process, that's even better.
You start adding the pieces and go from tentative to confirmative," Hunter-Cevera said.
The CIA's biowarfare program, which was designed to find ways to defend against bioterrorists, involved the use of small amounts of Ames strain, an agency spokesman said yesterday.
The CIA declined to say where its Ames strain material came from.
The spokesman said, however, that the CIA's anthrax was not milled into the volatile power form found in the letters and that none of it is missing.
Nevertheless, the FBI has turned its attention to learning more about the CIA's work with anthrax, which investigators were told about by the agency within the past few weeks, government officials said.
The CIA has tried to develop defenses against a vaccine-resistant strain of anthrax reportedly developed by the Russians several years ago.
While the CIA has had small amounts of Ames strain anthrax in its labs to "compare and contrast with other strains," a spokesman said, the agency did not "grow, create or produce the Ames strain."
The anthrax contained in the letters under investigation "absolutely did not" come from CIA labs, the spokesman said.
He also said that the FBI is fully aware of the CIA's work with anthrax and suggested investigators were satisfied with the information they had been provided.
Law enforcement sources, however, said the FBI remains extremely interested in the CIA's work with anthrax, with one official calling it the best lead they have at this point.
The sources said FBI investigators do not yet know much about the CIA program. 
Both law enforcement and intelligence officials said the CIA is cooperating with the FBI probe.
Investigators are considering a wide range of possible motives for the anthrax attacks, including vengeance of some sort, profiteering by someone involved in the anthrax cleanup business, or perhaps an effort by someone to cast blame on Iraq, which has an extensive bioweapons arsenal.
Whoever sent the letters could have a strong scientific background, officials said, but they also believe the material could have been stolen and mailed by someone without such expertise. 
A law enforcement source said the FBI did not initially include the CIA on its list of labs working with anthrax because the agency was not among 91 labs registered with the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to transfer anthrax specimens.
But as investigators interviewed workers at those known labs, they learned of the CIA's work, and in the past few weeks posed questions about it to the agency. 
scientists worked with other government agencies and outside contractors in the defensive biowarfare program, the agency spokesman said.
The agency said most of its defensive work involves simulants, not active biological agents.
"Everything we have done is appropriate and necessary and consistent with our treaty obligations," he said, adding that congressional oversight committees, along with the National Security Council staff, has been kept abreast of the CIA lab work.
"One of our missions is to learn about potential biological warfare threats," he said, adding that research can involve "anthrax and other biological agents."
Staff writer Joby Warrick contributed to this report. 
Washington Post reporter Steve Vogel covers local and regional military issues.
His Military Matters column runs every other week.
By formally moving last week to withdraw the United States from the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty, President Bush has opened the way to more aggressive testing of assorted technologies for defending the nation against long-range missile attack.
But he has not silenced arguments over whether such systems are feasible, affordable or necessary.
Bush's unilateral action is unsettling to critics at home and abroad who do not share his enthusiasm for jumping to a new strategic framework free of Cold War-style arms control accords.
Bringing them along will be a challenge.
The president and his team will have to come up with the answers to questions about how this new world order is supposed to function, and why other countries should feel reassured by America's new direction.
With the removal of the ABM Treaty freeing the administration to invest billions of dollars -- not to mention a major chunk of presidential political capital -- in fresh experimentation the stakes are higher than ever:
Either Bush and his fellow missile defense enthusiasts will win big, or they will fail spectacularly.
That the United States and the world should again be arguing over national missile defense ought to come as no surprise.
Missile defense is one of the great phoenixes of U.S. national security policy: It keeps rising from the ashes of Washington debates.
No sooner had the idea started to soar again under Bush this year than it seemed to falterafter the attacks of Sept. 11.
Critics argued that the terrorists' reliance on low-tech hijackings rather than high-tech missiles proved Bush had been concentrating on the wrong threat.
But Bush last week invoked the September tragedy as all the more reason to proceed with missile defense.
In a speech at The Citadel, the military college of South Carolina, Bush urged his audience to consider this: If terrorists could do the horrendous damage they did just by hijacking a few commercial airliners, imagine what might happen if they ever got their hands on long-range, nuclear-tipped missiles. 
Such is the nature of the enduring controversy over missile defense.
Each side will look at the same event and interpret it to its own ends.
It is a dynamic that has been at work since the first major public debate on the issue in the 1960s, long before Ronald Reagan's "Star Wars" initiative.
The Bush administration's ambitious testing program includes a provision for realizing at least a rudimentary antimissile system by the next presidential election in 2004.
The successful test earlier this month of a prototype land-based interceptor, which hit a mock enemy warhead over the central Pacific, has only reinforced the administration's drive.
But many scientists, arms control advocates and Democratic lawmakers remain either wary of oropposed to the project, questioning whether a national antimissile system can ever work reliably and be built affordably -- and whether enough of a threat exists to warrant such a weapon.
Even if Russia and our NATO allies end up grudgingly accepting U.S. abandonment of the ABM Treaty, critics fear other adverse consequences.
It will, they warn, spur China to add to plans to build up its offensive weapons.
It will undermine U.S. attempts to persuade other nations to abide by their international commitments.
And it will undercut the credibility of international nonproliferation policies by appearing to presuppose their failure.
For Bush himself, the idea of an antimissile shield is tied less to the thought of ever needing to useit and more to allowing America to act abroad without fear of subjecting Americans at home to attack.
"You can't be an internationalist if you allow yourself to be blackmailed," the president told me in an interview last summer.
"If you believe, like I believe, that our values are so good and we can spread those values in a way that hopefully is not arrogant -- in a humble way -- if you believe that's important, which I do, then the corollary is: How do you make sure you're able to do that without somebody saying, 'If you move, if you act, if you decide to get involved, we'll blow you up'?"
What is it about missile defense that has made it so controversial for so long?
That question often ran through my mind during a year and a half of researching and writing a book on why an issue -- dismissed by many after the demise of the Soviet Union as a relic of the Cold War -- came surging back in the final years of the Clinton administration andassumed its place as a high-priority objective of the Bush administration.
Part of the answer lies in the gravity of what is at stake -- namely, survival in an age of nuclear weapons.
Since the 1960s, the United States has observed a strategic doctrine that relies on a balance of mutual nuclear terror to forestall a first strike.
Called "mutual assured destruction," this doctrine is credited with having prevented nuclear war between Washington and Moscow for four decades.
So understandably, there is a reluctance among many to tamper with success.
Additionally, there is no scientific certainty as to whether an antimissile system capable of defending the entire United States can be devised.
Scientists appear as divided on this questionas politicians.
Cost is also a big factorin the controversy.
Missile defense promises to be very, very expensive, with rough estimates ranging from $30 billion for a basic land-based system to well over $100 billion for an advanced, multi-layered architecture.
But ultimately, the passions aroused by missile defense cannot be explained simply by differences over deterrence theory, scientific capabilities or budgetary trade-offs.
The issue has taken on a transcendent, symbolic significance.
It has become a litmus test in the debate between the political left and right over the best approach to keeping America militarily strong and secure -- whether, in broad terms, the defense of the nation is better served by arms advances or arms control, by military buildups or diplomatic building blocks, by unilateral initiatives or compromise accords.
When framed in this way, the argument tends to arouse the fervor of clashes over theology, with religious terms often invoked.
Proponents talk of the "morality" of erecting a national defense.
Opponents speak of the "sanctity" of the ABM Treaty.
The Sept. 11 tragedy has not only provided new debating points for both sides.
It also has changed some basic realities.
On the one hand, the administration has found it easier to get more money for its aggressive research and testing program.
Democrats who had moved previously to cut the administration's $8.3 billion request for missile defense and attach conditions to ensure that testing would remain within terms of the ABM Treaty have been inclined to avoid a partisan wrangle and let Bush's initiative proceed, at least for now .
Bush's own elevated popularity also has given him more political leeway for moves such as dismantling the ABM Treaty.
On the other hand, missile defense has lost some of its prominence as the administration's dominant military project.
It is now forced to share the stage with the new war on terrorism at home and overseas, and the threat of long-range missile attack seems to many people much more remote than the possibility of another hijacked airplane or envelope stuffed with anthrax.
No Third World country can yet threaten the U.S. homeland with an ICBM.
Even those given the greatest chance of doing so soonest -- North Korea, Iran, Iraq and Libya -- are relying on facilities and technologies that are primitive by U.S. standards.
And the leading threat case, North Korea, has shown a willingness to drop its whole effort in return for financial assistance from the United States.
Nevertheless, the trend is worrisome.
Even if North Korea could be taken out of the picture, other emerging Third World missile states still may prove determined to acquire substantial capabilities, if only because of the political leverage accompanying possession of such weapons.
One question often asked is whether a hostile Third World state, even if it came to possess an ICBM, would actually fire it at the United States, given the likelihood of subsequent annihilation by U.S. missiles.
But it may not have to shoot to have an effect.
Simply the ability to launch a long-range missile may well influence how future U.S. administrations respond to that country or to regional crises that might bring the United States into conflict with it.
Bush is not putting forward a definite architecture or exact timetable for development.
Rather, he has embarked on a set of experiments to see which of several alternatives -- land-, sea-, air- or space-based systems aimed at midcourse or boost-phase intercept -- will prove most workable.
Additionally, Bush team members have indicated that even if something does not ensure 100 percent effectiveness, they may be willing to put it in the field, believing some weapon is better than none and that improvements will come over time.
This approach offers some promise of finding an optimum design.
But the cost of all this experimenting is sure to be substantial, jeopardizing other military projects more popular with senior military commanders.
When I asked Bush what his own criteria will be for deciding what kind of antimissile system to build, he replied, "Here are the criteria: Does it work?
Is it cost effective?
And how does it fit into the priorities of the United States?
"
All good questions: In fact, just the ones that critics and proponents have been arguing about for more than 40 years.
Now that Bush is doing away with the ABM Treaty, he will have to provide answers.
He and other missile defense enthusiasts will no longer be able to blame treaty constraints for foiling development.
They will have to demonstrate that their new strategic framework will indeed increase global security.
They will have to provide reassurance that their real aim is indeed limited to guarding against Third World missile attack, not gaining strategic advantage over Russia and China.
They will have to keep the Europeans from feeling estranged, and prove that a U.S. antimissile system will not undermine other international efforts at countering proliferation.
In short, they will have to show that missile de-
fense can work not only technically and financially, but politically.
Bradley Graham covers military affairs for The Post.
He is the author of "Hit to Kill: The New Battle over Shielding America from Missile Attack" (Public Affairs).
The U.S. Marines said today that they were preparing to abandon this outpost in the sand and move to the Kandahar airport, where they were building a detention camp for as many as 300 prisoners.
Concertina wire was being stretched out to divide a large metal shed beside the airport into separate pens.
The Marines, who secured the airport Friday, have been told to expect the arrival of 100 to 300 fighters who might surrender or be captured near Tora Bora in eastern Afghanistan.
Some of the fighters were already en route this evening.
"These are hard-core people," said a Marine officer, speaking on condition of anonymity.
"If they see the opportunity to overpower their guards, they will, even if it means their own lives.
"
About 2,000 Marines are at Camp Rhino, southwest of Kandahar, and at the international airport about 12 miles southeast of the city.
More Marines arrive every day from the USS Bataan in the Arabian Sea, pausing briefly at Camp Rhino and then flying on to Kandahar.
The Marines' mission at Kandahar holds more potential perils than they have faced at this remote desert airstrip they seized Nov. 25 as a base for reconnaissance patrols.
Security remains tenuous at the airport, which was the scene of intense fighting until the Taliban militia fled.
Small numbers of Taliban fighters and members of Osama bin Laden's al Qaeda terrorist network have melted into the civilian population, the officer said, making them difficult to identify.
Navy and Marine explosives crews have found large amounts of unexploded ordnance near the runway and munitions stockpiled in buildings at the airport.
Throughout the day, explosions resounded throughout the airport as nine caches of munitions were destroyed, including air-to-air rockets, rocket powered grenades, handguns, machine guns and surface-to-surface rockets.
The crews also detonated ordnance found near an adjacent mosque, much of it from U.S. cluster bombs.
The explosives did not damage the mosque, though its facade was marked with bullet holes, apparently from previous battles.
A 19-member U.S. chemical and biological weapons inspection team arrived in one of the first helicopters to land at the Kandahar airstrip after it was secured by the Marines.
So far, the team has found only standard ordnance, some with "strange markings," the officer said.
One concern has been temporarily resolved.
An SA-3 missile was found on a hilltop overlooking the runway.
Flights from Camp Rhino to Kandahar were suspended Friday until Afghans allied with Gul Agha Shirzai, a tribal leader who fought the Taliban, surrounded it so that it posed no threat to incoming planes, the officer said.
Flights resumed before dawn today.
With their attention focused on the airport, Marines are no longer stopping vehicles and searching them for fleeing fighters.
That responsibility has been assumed by Gul Agha's forces, who now man a security checkpoint about a half-mile beyond the Marine perimeter, allowing only U.S. and coalition forces to pass.
The Marines are trying to make the airport safe for humanitarian groups and commercial planes.
Only 3,000 to 4,000 feet of the runway is now usable, according to Marine spokesmen.
The terminal's doors have been kicked in, and most of its windows were shattered by the bombing and battles that occurred before the U.S. troops arrived.
At Camp Rhino, Marines waiting to go to Kandahar played baseball in the compound courtyard today and did chin-ups on scaffolding.
All troops and supplies are expected to be transferred to Kandahar within weeks, and this desert airstrip built near a former hunting lodge, where blowing sand clogs equipment and makes life miserable, will be abandoned.
Washington Post reporter Steve Vogel covers local and regional military issues.
His Military Matters column runs every other week.
They could hardly have given more in the biggest game of the Washington Redskins' season.
And after yesterday's 20-6 loss to the Philadelphia Eagles, running back Stephen Davis and linebacker LaVar Arrington shared the same feeling of disappointment and bewilderment, knowing it was a game they could have won.
Davis proved the sole reliable element of an offense that undermined itself with penalties, dropped passes and interceptions, rushing for 111 yards on 24 carries.
But in the locker room afterward, he had nothing to say about the loss that dropped the Redskins to 6-7 and all but snuffed out their hopes of making the playoffs.
"It's best that way," Davis said, explaining his self-imposed silence.
Arrington, meantime, talked himself in circles as he sat in front of his locker, his white pants streaked with grass stains and his right foot aching from an unrecalled collision.
Arrington spoke but stopped short of explaining exactly why the Redskins were routed so handily by an Eagles team they had handled, 13-3, three weeks earlier.
"I don't have any idea why the outcome was different," Arrington said.
"We felt we prepared for everything they were going to come out with.
We felt confident ?
at least my side of the ball [the defense].
We felt really confident coming into this game.
I can't answer for everybody else."
While there was plenty of blame to go around, the Redskins' offense bore the brunt, defaulting on numerous scoring chances.
Quarterback Tony Banks threw two interceptions.
Redskins receivers dropped at least eight passes.
Place kicker Brett Conway missed a pair of field-goal tries.
And seven penalties added up to 58 lost yards.
But from the first quarter to the fourth, Davis kept pounding the ball, averaging 4.6 yards per carry.
And the defense ? once again led by Arrington (eight tackles, one interception, two passes defended and half-sack) ? refused to become dispirited, coming up with huge plays to give the offense chances.
"Not only do I have great respect for them, I like them," Coach Marty Schottenheimer said of his defense, which forced four turnovers and held the Eagles to 287 total yards.
"I like them because of the energy they bring and the way they play."
After a ragged opening series by both teams, Redskins defensive tackle Dan Wilkinson sparked the home crowd of 84,936 by defying gravity, at 325 pounds, to leap over a pair of Philadelphia defenders and intercept quarterback Donovan McNabb.
But the turnover ?
the first of the game ?
went for naught as Conway clanged the right upright on his field-goal attempt from 39 yards.
Conway made 47- and 25-yarders to give the Redskins a 6-0 lead.
But the game's momentum shifted midway through the second half, when McNabb fired a four-yard touchdown pass to Freddie Mitchell.
Time and again, the Redskins' defense struck back.
But each time it wrested the ball from the Eagles, the offense defaulted.
Defensive end Marco Coleman felt he was a step slow rushing McNabb on one play in the second quarter, so he fixed on McNabb's eyes, desperate to read where the quarterback intended to throw.
Coleman reached up with his giant left arm, tipped the ball, and Arrington grabbed it for his third interception of the season.
But the offense did nothing.
Weary of the offense's futility, hundreds of Redskins fans started heading for the exits in the fourth quarter, their team trailing 20-6.
They missed two spectacular plays by the defense's senior statesmen.
With the ball at their 20 and less than eight minutes to play, the Eagles, for reasons cornerback Darrell Green couldn't understand, decided to throw despite leading by 14 points.
Lined up in man-to-man coverage, Green stepped in front of wideout Na Brown for his first interception, marking the 19th consecutive season in which he has had one.
"I was just trying to stick with my guy," Green said, "and there the ball was.
I wish I could say I was that great of a player or that great of a genius.
But it just worked out."
The possession that followed ?
starting on the Eagles 31 ?
fizzled on a false-start penalty and an incompletion.
A Redskins loss seemed inevitable, but defensive end Bruce Smith had other ideas ? and ripped the ball out of running back Duce Staley's hands with less than five minutes to play.
Fans roared with approval, and Smith got a huge hug on the sideline from Coleman.
Less than two minutes later, the defense was back on the field.
That's how long it took the offense to squander this last scoring chance, with Banks following a 27-yard completion to Michael Westbrook with his second interception.
Arrington was asked if the defense could have done more.
He paused and said: "In my opinion, you can always do more.
But in a real world, I think we played one heck of a game.
Theoretically, you can always do better.
You can always add to what's going on.
But if you ask me, how did we play?
What's my assessment of the defense?
We gave it everything we had."
Given what's now a near-insurmountable road to the playoffs ?
with the 10-3 Chicago Bears up next ?
few in the locker room had enthusiasm for talking postseason scenarios.
"There are two things," Green said, summing up the issues in the wake of the latest loss. "
Number one is: What does it look like for the playoffs?
Second is: Who are we as a group of men?
Obviously, I can't answer the playoff thing.
But I think I can answer that we are a good, solid group, and we will be ready to come back and compete next week ?
regardless of what the first answer is.
"
Arrington vowed to stay the course.
"I'm going to continue to do what I've done from day one," he said.
"That's go out there, and whatever happens, happens.
That how I've always looked at things.
You can't always control what happens.
This is a team sport.
It's 53 guys.
We've all got to play our part.
So whatever happens, happens.
But you know one thing: 56 is going to show up.
I'm going to show up."
Gunmen killed a Florida couple, their 8-year-old grandson and two others during a robbery on a central Cuban highway, official sources and family members said Tuesday.
Four were identified as members of the same family and the fifth as a family friend who was driving the car.
Family members and a morgue employee said the victims were shot to death.
Multiple killings are almost unheard of, and slayings of visitors to the communist country whose economy depends heavily on foreign tourism are extremely rare.
Osmani Placencia of Hialeah, Fla., identified the dead as his parents, Ada Lorenzo, 52, and Celedonio Placencia, 62, both Cuba natives with legal U.S. residency; his son, Daniel Osmani Placencia, 8, of Cuba; his sister, Yailen Placencia, 28, of Cuba; and Domingo Delgado, a family friend who was driving.
The couple flew to Cuba on Sunday to deliver medicine and supplies to sick relatives in Santa Clara.
Cuba's official media did not report the killings and there was no comment Tuesday from official government spokesmen.
But several government sources privately confirmed the five were slain in an apparent robbery attempt in Matanzas province while driving east from Havana to visit relatives in Santa Clara, in Las Villas province.
It wasn't immediately clear if the killings occurred Sunday or Monday.
A woman reached later at the forensic services office the morgue in Matanzas said the victims had been shot.
The woman also refused to give her name.
Most Cubans are not allowed to carry firearms, which are restricted to police and the military.
However, criminals have been known to obtain firearms on the black market.
"They robbed them and then they killed them," Placencia told Spanish language television in Miami.
Family and friends of the victims, gathered in Florida Tuesday to mourn and remember.
Yisel Placencia, the couple's daughter, broke down as she looked at photographs of the victims.
One showed her sister Yailen smiling as she hugged their parents.
Another showed Daniel happily playing in front of his Santa Clara home.
Jorge Lorenzo, Ada Lorenzo's brother, said family members had no plans to go to Cuba and that Cuban authorities assured them they were working "night and day" on the case.
Cuban exile groups in Miami who oppose leader Fidel Castro said the killings show the Caribbean island is dangerous.
The bodies were retrieved by a relative early Tuesday from the Matanzas morgue and taken to a funeral home in Santa Clara, where several hundred people paid their respects amid heavy police security.
"What is certain is that they were murdered," Armando Lopez, a neighbor of the victims' relatives in Santa Clara, told Associated Press Television News.
"Nobody knows why."
Officials at the U.S. Interests Section, the American mission here, said they had no information about the case but would not be contacted if no American citizens were involved.
The Bush administration today vetoed a Security Council resolution calling for the withdrawal of Israeli forces from Palestinian-controlled territory and condemning acts of terror against civilians, U.S. officials said.
John D. Negroponte, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said council action would have complicated U.S. diplomatic efforts to obtain a cease-fire in the Middle East conflict.
And he faulted the Arab-sponsored resolution because it failed to directly address a recent string of suicide attacks against Israeli civilians.
"No one is working harder than we are to end the terror, violence and suffering that has afflicted the Israeli and Palestinian people for too long," he told the council before the early morning vote on the resolution. "
Unfortunately, the resolution before us fails to address the dynamic at work in the region.
Instead, its purpose is to isolate politically one of the parties to the conflict through an attempt to throw the weight of the council behind the other party."
Twelve of the council's 15 members voted in favor of the resolution, while Britain and Norway abstained.
The United States cast the lone veto, blocking the Palestinians' latest attempt to enlist the Security Council in their quest to halt Israel's military activities in the West Bank and Gaza.
The Palestinian-backed resolution called for an "immediate cessation of all acts of violence, provocation and destruction" in the Palestinian territories.
It also underlined the "essential role" of the Palestinian Authority in the peace process and urged the establishment of an undefined "monitoring mechanism" to observe human rights violations in the region.
Israel has opposed previous Palestinian requests for the deployment of international monitors in the occupied territories.
Israeli diplomats today portrayed the Palestinian initiative as especially offensive in light of recent suicide bombings.
"It does not even refer to acts of terrorism by the Palestinians," said Aaron Jacob, Israel's deputy U.N. ambassador.
Palestinian U.N. representative Nasser Kidwa said he was forced to turn to the Security Council after Israel severed ties with Yasser Arafat and his Palestinian Authority last week because Arafat had failed to halt attacks against civilians.
Kidwa faulted the Bush administration for refusing to use its influence to restrain Israel's military.
"We are the little guys," Kidwa said.
"We are the people under occupation and it is our right and a duty to come to the body responsible for international peace and security, to the United Nations, to the Security Council and try to help the situation."
It is the second time the United States has vetoed a resolution on the Middle East conflict since violence erupted in September 2000, imperiling the peace process and leaving at least 776 Palestinians and 233 Israelis dead.
On March 27, the United States blocked another Palestinian resolution calling for the establishment of an international monitoring force.
The Palestinian resolution lacked some of the more overtly anti-Israeli language that has graced earlier Palestinian texts.
But Washington's resistance to Security Council action on the Middle East has hardened since the recent Palestinian militant attacks against Israeli civilians.
Washington Wizards swingman Michael Jordan, chin down with a joker smile, dribbled the ball on the left wing in front of Memphis Grizzlies forward Rodney Buford.
The look was an indication that Jordan was about to school Buford, the manner in which the lesson would be applied being the only mystery.
Then came the hard dribble, the dipped shoulder, the penetration to the basket toward the baseline, the look at the rim, then the no-look pass to center Brendan Haywood, who finished things off with a dunk.
The surprise of the play wasn't so much that Jordan passed up the shot for an assist.
It was that all of Jordan's teammates were in position:
Haywood cut to the basket in an open passing lane; another Wizard was free to shoot a three-pointer in case Jordan kicked it out; one was down low for the potential rebound; and the trailer was set to get back in transition defense.
The Wizards are finally getting it.
Washington didn't miss a beat when it lost Christian Laettner, who is out for a month with a broken left fibula, beating Toronto on Sunday for its sixth straight victory.
Keying the winning streak, which has given the Wizards an 11-12 record heading into Wednesday night's home game against the Atlanta Hawks, is the comfort level Jordan's teammates now have playing with him -- and vice versa.
"I just think that the guys are starting to accept their roles and we feel very dedicated going out and putting that on the basketball court," Jordan said.
"The effort and determination, the education that [Coach Doug Collins] has been trying to pass on to these players; I think they are starting to comprehend.
Believe me, we are starting to play collectively together, and I think that has made a big difference in our success.
They haven't stood around watching me."
In the season's early stages, especially when Washington lost eight consecutive games, some players were too reliant on Jordan despite his inconsistent performances and infrequent participation in practices, some Wizards recently admitted.
This was the legendary Jordan, they thought.
King of imposing his will, ruler of the game.
So what if he is 38?
The memories of Jordan as a Chicago Bull were hard to shake, even though this didn't look like the same guy who, at one time in his career, could win games one on five.
"Some of the guys just waited for Michael to do everything," forward Popeye Jones said.
Jordan played his part in the early dysfunctional play, shooting, shooting and shooting some more, even if balls kept clanging off the rim or missing it altogether.
Over the team's first 13 games he averaged 25 attempts and the Wizards started 3-10.
Not trusting some of his teammates and believing he could still do whatever he needed when it counted, Jordan kept his teammates idling on the court like a high-count pitcher who keeps stagnant outfielders begging for a ball to be hit their way.
"It was a difficult transition," said shooting guard Richard Hamilton, who led the team in scoring last season and has been the top offensive weapon in the Wizards' six-game winning streak.
"We had guys on the team last year that had different roles.
Michael came back and he was the central point of our offense.
We really didn't have a great niche."
Now, players are sharing the ball, rotating on defense and making the extra pass -- especially Jordan, who has averaged 21 shots in the past 10 games.
Jordan is the team's top scorer (23.5 points per game), but he also leads the team in assists and is third in rebounding .
"All the emphasis people want to focus on is what Michael isn't doing," Collins said.
"It's hard for people to view what he is doing now because they compare him to what he did in Chicago in a totally different role.
I knew he would lead us in assists.
I knew he would be one of our best rebounders."
While the team is winning, Jordan's plan to make his teammates better appears to be working.
It took a while for chemistry to develop during Jordan's tenure in Chicago, and the same has happened in Washington.
In both cases there was give and take, but now Jordan appears more willing to play the role of the sidekick instead of leading man.
Jordan, who has been bothered by tendinitis in his right knee, has deferred to Hamilton of late, saying he "complements" the third-year guard, who "is the future" of the franchise.
Hamilton, second in scoring with 20.3 points per game, may have had the hardest time getting used to playing with Jordan.
Although Hamilton had a solid training camp and played fairly well on offense early on, he often forced shots and broke the offensive scheme and triggered a domino effect.
Hamilton's offense-first mentality elicited constant cries from Collins -- just like his past coaches in Washington -- to expand his game, especially on the defensive end.
Hamilton's slow reaction prompted Collins to bring Hamilton off the bench for four games.
Hamilton got the hint.
With Washington winning eight of its past 10 games, no player has stepped forward more than Hamilton.
He has markedly stepped up his defensive effort and has taken over offensively when Jordan goes to the bench.
"Michael is getting a better feel for me," Hamilton said.
"He's starting to understand what I can do.
Coach is starting to understand what I can do.
I am starting to understand where I fit in.
At the beginning of the year, I didn't know where I fit in.
I didn't know what they wanted me to do.
Now they are letting me play."
Said Collins: "Rip is growing.
I'm very proud of him.
Early in the season, we would talk about his defense, his rebounding.
We'd talk about him being a better passer.
Now he's doing all those things.
He's got a chance to be an all-star in this league."
There is some thought that the Wizards are rolling now because of Jordan's public declaration "We stink," which followed a 94-75 loss to the Cleveland Cavaliers Nov. 27.
Washington has only lost twice since, but players said Jordan's remarks had a minimal effect in the team's resurgence.
"Collectively we all said, 'Guys, we're better than this, come on,' especially after the Cleveland loss.
That was the lowest point of this early season," Jones said.
"The biggest thing was the coaching staff stayed positive with us and we held together and worked through things.
"
Equally as vital as Jordan and his teammates meshing has been the firm rotation Collins established -- one that includes Haywood.
After spending the first 12 games on the injured list, Haywood debuted in the Cleveland loss and has made a major impact.
Collins consistently uses a nine- and sometimes 10-man rotation now.
He pulls Jordan, center Jahidi White and point guard Chris Whitney at the four-minute mark of the first and third quarters in favor of reserves Hubert Davis or Tyrone Nesby, Haywood and Tyronn
Lue, who play six to eight minutes.
As a whole, the Wizards have jelled even more since Jordan's playing time was decreased by about two minutes per game after he sat out Washington's Dec. 4 loss to San Antonio to rest his knee.
Having learned not to rely so much on Jordan, Wizards players say they feel more at ease.
There was a "feeling that [Jordan was the only option] at first, but now guys are getting used to playing with Mike and now he's giving us a chance," Lue said.
"It makes everyone feel better for everyone to be contributing now.
That's what we needed all along."
Toronto Raptors swingman Vince Carter started today's game against the Washington Wizards on a tear, showing up Michael Jordan by draining three-pointers at will and scoring 23 first-half points.
But the Wizards, down by 19 points in the second quarter, didn't flinch before a sellout crowd of 20,048 at Air Canada Centre.
They ratcheted up their defense on Carter, holding him scoreless in the second half, and beat the Raptors, 93-88, for their sixth consecutive victory.
Washington's winning streak is its longest since December 1997.
The Wizards are off to their best start since the 1996-97 season, which happens to be the last time they went to the playoffs.
"Our guys are confident," Wizards Coach Doug Collins said.
"What was nice was that we won with our defense in that third quarter.
It wasn't like we set the world on fire offensively, but we gave ourselves a chance defensively.
We're growing up.
Now we've got a chance, if we get Atlanta on Wednesday, we're a .500 team [even] with an eight-game losing streak [earlier this season].
That would be pretty phenomenal."
Much of the intrigue centered around the first regular season meeting between Jordan and Carter, University of North Carolina products who established themselves as two of the most electrifying players in the NBA, albeit in different eras.
However, after Carter's initial jolt of four three-pointers in the first quarter, the game evened out with Jordan and Carter being little more than complementary components.
The Wizards allowed Carter, who played 44 minutes despite being in foul trouble, only four second-half shots.
Backup forward Tyrone Nesby, who spelled Jordan, got Carter out of his rhythm in the second quarter, when the Wizards' backups led the comeback.
"I just went out there and tried to stay close on him when he did and didn't have the ball," Nesby said.
"I was trying to stay on him and frustrate him.
Guys kind of fed off it.
Then we cut the lead and ended up winning the game."
Jordan, who had given Carter a big cushion early so Carter couldn't drive to the basket, stifled Toronto's leading scorer in the second half with a little help from occasionally trapping teammates.
"He's a tough cover," Jordan said.
"It took me a whole quarter to learn his tendencies and take his rhythm away.
Team-wise, we did a good job on him."
Jordan played second fiddle again to guard Richard Hamilton, who led the Wizards with 27 points.
Jordan added 21, with 13 in the second half.
It was the Wizards' reserves, however, who were the key reasons the Raptors lost their fourth consecutive game and sixth game in seven.
Rookie big men Kwame Brown and Brendan Haywood (11 rebounds, 9 points, 3 blocks) delivered the energetic spark late in the first quarter to stem Toronto's impressive start and trigger Washington's comeback.
Shortly after coming in, Brown scored on a dunk to bring the Wizards to 33-18.
Haywood then stole the inbounds pass and threw down a dunk.
Those momentum-swinging plays came in a 16-1 run in which Washington pulled from down 33-14 to down 34-30.
"I looked at Kwame when I was about to check in the game and said, 'We've got to pick it up, we're dead in the water,' " Haywood said. "
Kwame came in and got a tip dunk, I got a steal for the jam.
We just wanted to come out there and create some energy because we were playing kind of stiff."
Brown (10 rebounds, nine points) was scheduled to start in place of injured forward Christian Laettner (broken left fibula), but he came off the bench once the Raptors' all-star forward Antonio Davis returned to the starting lineup after missing the past five games with a sore left knee.
Collins felt that Wizards veteran Popeye Jones (four points, seven rebounds) would be a better matchup against Davis, who scored 12 points and grabbed a game-high 14 rebounds.
Backup point guard Tyronn Lue added nine points as Washington's reserves outscored the Raptors' backups 28-10.
All of Toronto's bench points came from center Keon Clark.
After pulling to 52-46 at halftime, the Wizards took the lead for good in the third quarter when Jordan's jump shot made it 58-56.
Washington built its lead to eight in the fourth quarter, but guard Alvin Williams's two free throws with 6 minutes 47 seconds left brought the Raptors to 78-77.
Jones countered, then guard Chris Whitney sandwiched two three-pointers around a Haywood free throw.
The Wizards led 89-79 with 3:06 left, closing the door on the Raptors.
Wizards Note: Laettner, who will be out at least a month after breaking his left fibula in Friday's victory over the New York Knicks, said the timing of his injury couldn't have been worse.
"You never want it to happen, but it hurts more now because we're playing so well now," said Laettner, who traveled with the team to Toronto.
"You really want to be playing."
Laettner was hurt when he and New York forward Latrell Sprewell banged knees.
Laettner said he knew he was seriously hurt almost immediately.
"It was a freak thing," Laettner said.
"You get kneed a lot and he kneed me hard and my leg was planted and he got me in a bad spot.
I knew once I got up and started walking on it something was wrong."
The Rockies sent White and pitching prospect Luke Hudson to the Reds for left-handed reliever Dennys Reyes and Reese, a second baseman who was Cincinnati's top base-stealer the last three seasons.
Last season, Reese hit .224 with nine home runs, 40 RBIs and 25 stolen bases.
Reyes went 2-6 with a 4.92 ERA with Cincinnati last season.
He was placed on the 15-day disabled list for tightness in his forearm and was optioned to Triple-A Louisville upon his return July 2.
He was 4-2 with a 3.67 ERA in Louisville.
White struggled with the Rockies early last season and wound up 1-7 with a 6.25 ERA.
The right-handed Hudson was 7-12 with a 4.20 ERA for Double-A Carolina.
The Bush administration and its Mideast envoy, retired Marine Gen. Anthony Zinni, have made it clear that no progress is possible in the current crisis until Yasser Arafat cracks down decisively on the two groups with chief responsibility for terror attacks: Hamas and Islamic Jihad.
Yet Arafat has failed to arrest most of those on a list Zinni has given him.
Indeed, he arrests those who are not a threat and makes little effort to arrest those who are.
The three members of Hamas who carried out the bus attack last week -- an attack that killed 10 people and wounded 30 -- had long been on a list of those the Israelis had asked the Palestinian Authority to arrest.
Demands without consequences have rarely had much effect on Arafat.
It is time for a consequence.
It is time for an American ultimatum.
The ultimatum must be very clear, with specific demands and an unmistakable consequence.
The demands: that Arafat arrest all those on the list of 33 that Zinni gave him.
That he shut down Hamas and Islamic Jihad offices and symbolic elements of the Dawa -- the social services and support structure that is the lifeblood of Hamas.
(Nothing is more likely to stop Hamas support for terror than to know that the Palestinian Authority is going to take over the Dawa.)
He must make a concerted effort to shut down the bomb-making and mortar-producing factories in the West Bank and Gaza.
And he must make -- not simply issue -- a statement in Arabic in which he denounces terror as a threat to the Palestinian cause, makes clear that those who have perpetrated the violence deny the Palestinian people any chance to achieve their aspirations, declares that the Palestinian Authority will not tolerate terror and will arrest all involved in its planning, organization and execution, and proclaims that only negotiations, not violence, can lead to achievement of Palestinian goals.
Arafat should be told he has 96 hours to take these steps, with the understanding that his security representatives report to U.S. officials every 12 hours on their progress.
We must be the judge of whether he has fulfilled the demands, and he must understand that if he does not, the United States will suspend its relations with the Palestinian Authority until such time as the demands are met.
Arafat should also understand that we will press the Europeans and others to join us in suspending relations if he does not fulfill these demands -- demands that go to the heart of his responsibility as a leader.
To give Arafat the maximum opportunity to fulfill this responsibility -- and to deny him any excuse for not doing so -- we should also insist that the Israelis stop all military activity against the Palestinians for the four days.
Whatever questions the Israelis may have about doing this, the larger reality is that they do not have a military solution to the problem of Hamas terror, and it is in Israeli interests for the United States to give Arafat an ultimatum.
Arafat will never submit to an Israeli ultimatum, but he might submit to ours.
An American ultimatum that could lead to the suspension of relations will affect the one thing Arafat truly values: the cause of Palestine.
His own persona has been fused with that cause.
His own legitimacy is tied to achieving international recognition of that cause and its advancement.
He can ill afford, after 15 months of a disastrous intifada, to have his own standing so clearly damaged by the possibility of international isolation.
For those who say Arafat does not have the power, the answer is that his weakness stems in no small part from not leading.
In the past 15 months, it is not that Hamas has gained such strength; it is that he has lost it.
Today, even at a time when Palestinian anger and frustration have never been higher, Palestinian polling shows that 70 to 75 percent of the Palestinian public does not support Hamas.
The problem for Arafat is that nearly 80 percent do not support him.
His support has declined during the intifada not because he failed to support violence and Palestinian martyrs -- of whom he speaks incessantly -- but because he offers no pathway forward, no strategy for ending the pain and suffering, no reason to believe he has any ideas at all except to wait to be rescued by the international community.
And the Palestinian public is too smart to believe that will ever happen.
Arafat's only salvation is to lead, to decide, to make a choice.
He is the master of avoiding decisions and hard choices.
His history suggests he makes a choice only when he has none.
An American ultimatum will leave him with no choice.
If he still fails to act, we, too, will have no choice.
But at least the Palestinian public will know what is required of their leadership if Palestinian interests are to be addressed.
The writer was director for policy planning in the State Department under President George H. W. Bush and special Middle East coordinator under President Clinton.
He is currently counselor for the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.
Afghanistan ?
Three U.S. Marines were wounded ?
one seriously ?
when one of them stepped on a land mine Sunday at the airport outside the southern Afghan city of Kandahar.
One of the Marines was carried on a stretcher and two, with bandaged hands, walked to a UN-H1 Huey helicopter for the 50-minute flight to a medical facility at Camp Rhino, the desert airstrip seized by the Marines on Nov. 25.
Capt.
David Romley, a Marines spokesman, said all three were in stable condition at Camp Rhino but that one could lose a leg.
The anti-personnel mine went off at the southern end of the runway at about 1 p.m. as the Marines were sweeping the airport for explosives, Romley said.
He said the area already had been swept for mines, but that the one which exploded may have been nonmetallic, making it harder to detect.
Parts of the airport and surrounding area are littered with ammunition and unexploded bombs as well as land mines that virtually surround the base.
"We could look for ordnance (at the airport) every day for a year and not uncover all of it," Romley said.
After the explosion, it took 65 minutes to evacuate the wounded because explosives teams had to make sure there were no other mines, he said.
Authorities would not identify the wounded Marines until their families could be notified.
The Marines moved into the airport on Friday, and plan to shift most of their operations there from Camp Rhino, 70 miles southwest of Kandahar.
After sweeping the runway, they declared it fit for use, and the first six C-130 planes landed Sunday, carrying troops and communications equipment, including satellite dishes.
The Marines also completed work Sunday on a detention facility for any prisoners-of-war who may be captured in Afghanistan, Romley said.
Disposal crews detonated nine caches of weapons Saturday in areas around the airport.
The munitions included air-to-air rockets, rocket-propelled grenades, handguns, machine guns and large BMG21 surface-to-surface rockets.
They also detonated unexploded bomblets from U.S. cluster bombs dropped on the area.
Sgt.
Michael J. Gattis said some explosives were even found among medicine at the airport's health clinic.
"They were storing munitions inside the hospital, intermingled with the medicines," Gattis said.
"Everywhere ... it looked like they left in a hurry.
It was a mess."
The now-vanquished Taliban militia came under heavy bombing at Kandahar's airport when U.S. forces began an intensive airstrike campaign in Afghanistan following the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on the United States.
The Taliban fled Kandahar, their birthplace and last stronghold, on Dec. 7.
By Robert O'Harrow Jr. Congress is on the verge of giving parents the right to say no when marketers want to gather personal information about students in schools.
Businesses for years have collected data about students and their families, often without parents' knowledge.
A company in New Jersey asked students to fill out detailed questionnaires about what they like on television.
A technology marketer traded computers and Internet access in exchange for the right to track what students did online.
One list broker has compiled information about millions of students, from kindergarten on.
Students have offered suggestions to Internet companies, and they've taste-tested cereals in exchange for fees to schools.
"They're basically selling access to kids without parents knowing about it," said Sen. Richard C. Shelby (R-Ala.)
, who joined Sen. Christopher J. Dodd (D-Conn.)
in pressing for the change.
"I don't think it's okay," Dodd said, adding that parents should have a voice. "
These companies were using the classroom for market research.
"
Their provision would require all public schools to notify parents when businesses want to gather students' personal information and give the parents the right to say no.
It is part of sweeping education reform legislation approved by the House last week and set for a vote by the Senate today.
The Bush administration has already signaled its support for the larger bill and the privacy section.
The vote follows months of debate about the role of commercial activity in the nation's schools.
Consumer advocates and parents groups warned that marketers were taking advantage of children's information.
Conservative groups supported the law in part as a way of bolstering parents' rights.
"The schools should be about learning, not to be information-collection centers for commercial marketers," said Frank Torres, legislative counsel for Consumers Union, the advocacy group that publishes Consumer Reports magazine.
School districts across the country increasingly rely on business deals to bring in much-needed cash in exchange for allowing advertising and market research, as well as direct sales of products such as soft drinks and candy.
Advertisers and magazine publishers successfully battled to tone down the proposal earlier this year.
They persuaded lawmakers to drop a provision requiring that parents give their permission before any information could be gathered for commercial purposes.
The businesses worried the stronger rule would have cut them off from schools that allow students to sell subscriptions to classmates to raise money and other sorts of promotions that often involve the collection of names, addresses and other personally identifiable information.
The National School Boards Association also fought hard against the privacy provision, saying the law could become an "administrative nightmare" that would hurt "productive relationships with businesses" at a time when school budgets are tight.
Jeffrey Ballabon, vice president of public policy at Primedia, a magazine publisher, said "a substantial amount of fundraising is done through schools.
That is a substantial source of revenue." 
American Student List, a leading list broker, gathers student information from a variety of sources, including a group that promises to help high school students who fill out detailed surveys to get into college.
Among the American Student List offerings is information about students' religious affiliations.
The company maintains a database "of over 4 million individuals between the ages of 14 and 19," according to its Web site.
They also target younger kids, including toddlers. "
To help you reach this highly lucrative market, ASL has compiled over 12 million names of children between the ages of 2 and 13, representing Pre-K through 8th grade," the company says in its literature online.
Company officials did not return phone calls.
Other companies gathered student information by providing computers and Internet access in exchange for names and online browsing habits.
The former ZapMe Corp., for example, gave schools across the country free computers, software and services for the right to record how students used the technology.
Daniel Fuller, a lobbyists for the association of school boards, said local school officials should have the right to make their own decisions about dealing with marketers.
"The compromise they came up with is not great, but it's better," Fuller said.
Gary Ruskin, executive director of Commercial Alert, a group that opposes commercialism in schools, also was not entirely pleased with the outcome.
But he said it's "a good small step forward."
Moderate Democrats could hold the key to breaking a partisan stalemate that has so far prevented Congress from passing an economic stimulus package.
President Bush and congressional Republicans talked Monday with several moderates, including Democratic Sen. John Breaux of Louisiana, to gauge whether enough Senate votes exist to push through a last-ditch effort at compromise.
House GOP leaders, Breaux said, don't want "to do something they don't think can pass the Senate.
I would just hope there has to be a way we can reach an agreement."
With Congress itching to leave town for the year, the House was considering whether to move ahead with a new package likely to combine GOP tax cuts for individuals and businesses with the Democrats' 13-week extension of unemployment benefits and a tax credit to help jobless people buy health insurance.
Republicans say significant support from Democratic centrists could increase pressure on Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D., to schedule a vote.
Daschle and the three other top congressional leaders planned to meet Tuesday with Bush at the White House to discuss the remaining Capitol Hill agenda.
An earlier $100 million House GOP package consisting mostly of tax cuts was never put to a vote in the Senate and a Democratic bill heavier on government spending was blocked by Republicans.
Putting a second economic stimulus bill on the House floor would also give Republicans a chance to vote for more generous unemployment benefits than those in the measure passed in October.
Democrats have repeatedly criticized that bill as a tax giveaway to wealthy individuals and multinational corporations and said the GOP was ignoring the plight of the unemployed.
White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said Bush "has talked extensively" in recent days to Senate moderates, including Breaux, in hopes of patching together sufficient support for Congress to pass a compromise bill.
House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Bill Thomas, R-Calif., said the main obstacle was Democratic insistence that increased health insurance assistance be based on existing COBRA coverage available to some, but not all, laid-off workers.
Republicans want a tax credit that would be available upfront to the unemployed and could be used to help pay for a wider range of health plans.
Senate Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus, however, said the GOP proposal would be "chaotic" and would be difficult to put in place in time to help unemployed people.
Baucus said Democrats had come a long way in supporting GOP income tax cuts.
"It gives Democrats heartburn, ulcers.
And they are willing to take the ulcers and the heartburn if they get the benefits," said Baucus, D-Mont.
Details of a second House bill were still being worked out Monday.
Several sources said key parts would resemble a proposal floated by Bush last week that was endorsed by Breaux and other Democratic centrists.
That measure included a new round of rebate checks aimed at lower-income workers and would cut the 27 percent income tax rate to 25 percent in 2002 rather than phasing the reduction in over several years.
There are also tax breaks for large and small businesses, including 30 percent immediate depreciation write-offs over the next three years.
Afghan fighters and U.S. Special Forces scoured mountainsides today in an effort to root out Osama bin Laden's loyalists, reporting advances against al Qaeda's positions but no fresh evidence that they were closing in on its leader.
Steady U.S. airstrikes and pressure by ground forces appeared to be scattering bin Laden's fighters across the rocky and forested mountains as they attempt to surrender, hide or escape.
Reports of impromptu surrender negotiations, mule-back escapes and isolated sniper fire created a picture today of a defending force in its final throes.
Afghan commanders and radio transmissions from the fighters at the front indicated that al Qaeda guerrillas were offering little resistance other than sporadic small-arms fire in what could be the culminating major operation of the 10-week-old U.S. military campaign in Afghanistan.
Afghan commanders said they have no evidence indicating the whereabouts of the primary target of the operation: bin Laden, who is blamed for the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
In Washington, officials said U.S. forces in Tora Bora believe they picked up a radio transmission by bin Laden this past week, perhaps indicating he was in the Tora Bora area.
But they cautioned that he may have escaped since then, and that the voice that was overheard might not have been his.
The sustained bombardment and the wide-ranging ground operations underscored the large military effort now required to dislodge what commanders say might be only a few hundred al Qaeda stragglers -- mostly Arabs and Chechens estimated to number between 200 and 1,000 -- in some of the world's most rugged and hostile terrain.
American B-52 bombers, fighter jets and AC-130 gunships have been pummeling the mountain ridges of Tora Bora and nearby Milawa around the clock for 16 days, although Afghan soldiers say that U.S. bombs frequently have missed their targets, simply gouging craters among massive boulders that litter the rugged landscape.
On the ground, Afghans loyal to the coalition that rules this corner of the country have advanced steadily up valleys and mountains, accompanied by U.S. and British special forces who are directing the assault and coordinating airstrikes.
In plain sight, meanwhile, was further evidence that the battle remained unfinished: bombing run after bombing run by U.S. planes that sent mushroom clouds of dust soaring skyward, smoky fires that crawled up tree lines to push al Qaeda holdouts from hiding places, and the very occasional burst of automatic weapons.
Today's fight played out amid a swirl of information, talk of surrender deals that didn't materialize and prisoners who may or may not have been taken. 
Much of the information was simply contradictory -- and impossible to verify on a day when Afghan commanders refused to allow reporters to visit the front line.
Early this morning, field commander Mohammed Pahlawan said 300 Arabs were ready to surrender at 10 a.m.
Asked if it was a trick to buy time, he replied, "There is no way for them to escape, so they have told us they will surrender."
At about 10 a.m., a voice crackled over the Afghans' radio frequency.
"They are surrendering," the voice said.
"Be careful."
But the deadline came and went without the Arabs laying down their guns.
About 35 minutes after the deadline, four successive bombing runs peppered the crest of a nearby ridge.
A voice from a battlefield radio reported that the first plane missed its intended target, the mouth of a cave.
One gunman charged out of the cave firing a machine gun.
"After the second and third runs, the person disappeared," said the voice on the radio. "
He is killed."
Even so, forward observers dispatched a fourth bomb load to the site.
That plane missed its target, the radio reported.
The radio traffic also offered a glimpse of the confusion surrounding the final hunt for the bin Laden loyalists, as Afghan fighters cautiously advanced toward remaining al Qaeda positions, anxiously called off U.S. warplanes and searched in vain for enemies they fear might have already fled to Pakistan.
Some of the voices over the radio were plaintive, some eager, some humorous.
"The weather is very cold," one Afghan fighter radioed this morning.
"Tell the Americans to continue the bombardment.
I cannot fire."
After reporting the presence of only a few al Qaeda fighters, he joked: "Tell the Americans to use gas to finish them. . . .
I'm very cold."
A late-morning radio exchange illustrated the degree to which the U.S. bombing has been coordinated with the Afghan ground forces -- and how little the al Qaeda forces apparently are fighting back.
Move ahead, an Afghan commander ordered over the radio.
"If you face any resistance, give us information to drop bombs," he said.
Ten minutes later, around 11:40 a.m., the report came back.
"We are on the top of the mountain," a fighter said.
"Tell them to stop bombing."
Overhead, a B-52 bomber heading for the ridge line curved away from its target, its white vapor trail slicing through the brilliant azure sky.
Despite the Afghans' advances, field commanders and fighters expressed concern that many of the al Qaeda forces might have found a way to escape.
On the radio, one commander issued a stern warning at midday not to believe the promises to surrender. "
Don't give them time.
They are taking advantage of the time," said the commander.
"Take practical action.
This is no joke to solve this problem."
On Friday night, the commander reported, a captured al Qaeda soldier told the Afghans that 50 Arabs were escaping from the mountains by mule, hoping to flee over the border to Pakistan.
"We arrested one," he said on the radio. "
The others have escaped.
They have found a way."
Throughout the afternoon, conflicting reports emerged about a group of Chechens fighting for al Qaeda.
One radio report indicated 60 Chechens had fled their mountaintop positions, leaving behind five injured soldiers and several dead.
Soon after, Murad Khan, a field commander arriving down the mountain from the front said about 300 al Qaeda troops were still in the mountains -- with the Arabs among them wanting to surrender and the Chechens refusing. "
No one has surrendered," Khan said.
An hour later, Pahlawan returned from the front.
After a fight this morning with the Chechen holdouts, he said, about 20 of them had been killed and 50 had surrendered.
"They surrendered because there was such pressure" from the U.S. bombs, he said.
The commander, who had started the day predicting a mass surrender that didn't happen, couldn't resist one last prediction. "
By evening, all of them will surrender," he said as his jeep jostled its way back down the mountain.
Instead, American AC-130 gunships were pounding the mountainsides again tonight, as the mop-up operations continued in Tora Bora and Milawa.
Washington Post reporter Steve Vogel covers local and regional military issues.
His Military Matters column runs every other week.
"John, I want you to take that ABM Treaty and dump it in the same place we dumped our ABM Treaty co-signer, the Soviet Union, and that is to say, on the ash heap of history," Helms said with a chuckle.
Less than nine months later, the ABM Treaty is, indeed, destined for the ash heap of history.
On Thursday, President Bush formally announced that the United States would withdraw from the landmark agreement to allow ambitious testing of missile defenses.
Yet, many arms control experts say the doctrine of nuclear deterrence, or mutually assured destruction, that the treaty enshrined remains alive and well.
It has even been a centerpiece of the Bush administration's efforts to win Russian acceptance of missile defense tests; officials in Washington have repeatedly assured their counterparts in Moscow that U.S. missile defenses will not be able to block a full-scale Russian nuclear strike.
The United States has about 5,950 strategic nuclear warheads capable of striking Russia, and Russia has about 5,800 strategic nuclear warheads capable of hitting the United States.
Because military planners on each side fear the other might strike, some of those weapons are always on alert, capable of being fired within minutes -- and that does not appear likely to change anytime soon.
Even though both countries have promised to reduce their arsenals and Bush spoke last week about replacing mutually assured destruction with "mutual cooperation," the militaries on both sides remain under orders to maintain the threat of annihilation.
"Our force is configured to hold Russian nuclear and economic targets at risk," said Joseph Cirincione, director of the nuclear nonproliferation project at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
"Even while we're talking to President [Vladimir] Putin, we're targeting his office.
It's a fact of life."
The nuclear balance of terror has been remarkably stable.
Even at the height of the Cold War, Russia and America tried to avoid coming to direct blows.
Now, as some American critics of the Bush administration's missile defense plan argue that it won't work, some Russian critics of the plan worry that it might.
Russian military planners fear that fewer than 100 of Moscow's warheads would be able to survive an American first strike and that a leap forward in missile defense technology might enable the United States to defend itself against that rump nuclear force, according to Bruce Blair, president of the Center for Defense Information, a Washington think tank.
"So they look to the future and the day when the U.S. might deploy a couple of hundred interceptors or so, and they do worry that their weakened nuclear force would be neutralized by even a thin U.S. system," Blair said.
Moreover, Russia's array of satellites and radars designed to warn of a nuclear attack is aging and losing reliability.
"This probably adds to the almost daily instability," said John Rhinelander, a lawyer who helped negotiate the ABM Treaty under President Richard M. Nixon.
"The Russian early warning system is full of holes, and Russia will keep large numbers of ICBMs on hair-trigger alert.
And I don't see how we'll improve that situation if we keep throwing sand in their face."
Some arms experts also argue that pulling out of the ABM Treaty could encourage Russian hard-liners who want to renounce parts of the START II agreement.
Under that pact, Russia is supposed to eliminate 100 SS-18 missiles, with 10 warheads each, and to reduce the number of warheads on each of its 100 SS-19 missiles from six to one by 2007.
Some Russian officials have suggested they might keep the multiple warheads to improve the chances of overwhelming any U.S. defenses.
Putin might have been better off if he had reached a deal with the Clinton administration, something senior Clinton administration officials tried to impress upon him.
But the Russian president, believing either that he had a better chance of a deal with Bush or that Bush would kill any deal made with Clinton, held out.
"What did the United States have to do to the ABM Treaty to make sure that we were dealing with new [missile] threats?
The answer is: There's a whole lot you can do without breaching the ABM Treaty," said Strobe Talbott, who tried to negotiate modifications in the ABM Treaty while serving as Clinton's deputy secretary of state.
"The other question is: Do you think that bilateral negotiated agreements between the United States and Russia with the force of law are still useful or not?
The Clinton administration felt they were very useful."
The Bush administration places higher priority on developing a layered missile defense system.
Even Colin L. Powell, regarded as the Bush official most reluctant to withdraw unilaterally from the treaty, stood behind Bush in May 2000 when the then-presidential candidate said he would pull out of the ABM Treaty if Russia did not allow missile defense tests.
More generally, the Bush administration tends to view global treaties with suspicion.
Perhaps nothing indicated that better than the choice of Bolton to lead negotiations on arms control.
Bolton summarized his philosophy in an article last fall in the University of Chicago Journal of International Law that divided the policy world into "Americanists" and "globalists."
He said globalists -- "each tightly clutching a favorite new treaty or multilateralist proposal" -- want to bind the United States in a web of agreements on everything from arms to the environment to human rights, while Americanists seek to preserve U.S. sovereignty and policy flexibility.
"Every time America is forced to bend its knee to international pressure," wrote Bolton, who has traveled to Moscow eight times this year for ABM talks, "it sets a significant, and detrimental, precedent for all of the others.
"
Far better, he has argued in congressional testimony and speeches, would be an approach that relies on informal agreements, glorified handshakes between leaders like Bush and Putin.
He has said that arms control accords became floors, rather than ceilings, on numbers of nuclear weapons.
Yet the Bush administration has bowed to the need for some written agreements.
Although the president's national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, said new targets for levels of strategic nuclear weapons would be set informally, Powell is now negotiating a formal, written agreement with verification measures.
Washington Post reporter Steve Vogel covers local and regional military issues.
His Military Matters column runs every other week.
If Osama bin Laden is killed or captured, the effectiveness of the terrorist network he heads will be reduced, but the network will not cease functioning, two senior FBI officials told a Senate subcommittee yesterday.
"We need to go beyond Osama bin Laden," J.T. Caruso, acting assistant director of the FBI's counterterrorism division, told the Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee on international operations and terrorism.
Caruso predicted that the loss of bin Laden and the elimination of terrorist bases in Afghanistan would reduce the ability of the al Qaeda network to commit "horrific acts" by 30 percent.
"That still means 70 percent" of the organization's capabilities for terror will remain intact, he warned the senators.
"It is too early to tell, from a law enforcement perspective, how the current military campaign in Afghanistan will affect al Qaeda and its ability to operate in the future," Caruso added.
If bin Laden had vanished five years ago, the story might be different, said Thomas Wilshere, deputy chief of the FBI's international terrorism operational section.
In that time, Wilshere said, al Qaeda has built a "critical mass" of several hundred "hard core" operatives capable of carrying out major acts of terrorism around the world.
In addition, he said, the network can count on support from thousands of people who "graduated" from its training camps in Sudan and Afghanistan during the 1990s.
Asked by Chairman Barbara Boxer (D-Calif.)
what the impact of bin Laden's death would be, Caruso answered, "We'll see a stuttering, but whether there will be a pause, we don't know."
"I don't believe there will be a VJ Day," he added, referring to the day that World War II ended.
"It is one thing to disrupt an organization such as al Qaeda.
It is another to totally dismantle and destroy it."
Wilshere, who has questioned several al Qaeda members, including some who testified as government witnesses in federal trials this year, said they described bin Laden as extraordinarily charismatic.
In contrast to the image of a man smiling with pleasure on a recent videotape as he recalled the World Trade Center attack, Wilshere said bin Laden was viewed by followers as "humble and down in the dirt with his troops, putting himself in the line of fire."
Since 1996, when bin Laden moved from Sudan to Afghanistan and set up headquarters there, roughly 15,000 Islamic recruits have gone through his terrorist training camps, according to a senior intelligence official.
But only a small percentage of them formally became al Qaeda members by signing an agreement called a bayat in Arabic, Wilshere said.
With that oath of allegiance, a person swears "to agree about the jihad, listen to the emir [bin Laden] . . .
and do whatever work they ask you" to do,
Jamal Ahmed Mohamed al-Fadl, a former al Qaeda member, testified during a trial in New York this year of participants in the 1998 bombing of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
Ahmed Ressam, an Algerian who became a government witness after being convicted in April of plotting to bomb Los Angeles International Airport, said in court that his fellow students in al Qaeda's training camps in 1998 came from Algeria, France, Germany, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Sweden, Turkey, Yemen and Russia's breakaway Chechnya region.
In his time, Ressam added, the trainees were gathered in national groups.
His Algerian cell included four other persons who moved to Europe under the control of an "emir" with connections back to two al Qaeda trainers, one in Pakistan and the other in Europe.
In Ressam's case, the cell decided independently on its target, which was to be a bombing inside the United States at the time of the millennium celebrations.
"There are conflicting thoughts on how much autonomy the cells had then, or have now," according to a senior administration official said.
Both the bin Laden videotape and the embassy bombing trial, he noted, showed that planning for major al Qaeda operations can take years.
Three Marines were wounded today, one of them seriously, when one of them stepped on a land mine at the Kandahar airport, a Marine spokesman said.
The Marine who stepped on the mine suffered severe injuries to a foot and lower leg, the spokesman said.
One of the other Marines suffered shrapnel injuries, bruises and a perforated eardrum, which may result in a permanent hearing loss.
The third man had cuts and scrapes.
The three men, from the 15th Marine Expeditionary Unit based in San Diego, were providing security for ordnance demolition teams searching a building at the airport, Marine spokesman Staff Sgt.
Daniel C. Hottle said.
They had already sidestepped several land mines when the Marine in the middle of the group stepped on one that exploded.
The Marines took control of the airport Friday, and have been sweeping it methodically rid the area of mines and other booby traps so it can reopen for humanitarian and commercial flights.
The airport and surrounding area had been the scene of intense fighting between al Qaeda and anti-Taliban forces.
The Marine who suffered foot and leg injuries was flown to an Air Force medical facility in the Persian Gulf region.
The others were flown to Camp Rhino, the desert airstrip seized by the Marines on Nov. 25, about a 45-minute flight away.
As the men were transported from the Camp Rhino airstrip by ambulance, about 50 Marines formed a line along a road within the compound leading to the hospital.
Their faces were somber as they watched the ambulance back into the hospital tent.
The names of the wounded Marines were not released pending notification of next of kin.
Haiti Police searched for coup conspirators Tuesday as some opposition leaders claimed that what President Jean-Bertrand Aristide called a failed coup was really staged as a pretext to crush dissent.
The attack touched off widespread protests and violence by Aristide supporters, who blamed the opposition in the attack on the National Palace.
"The so-called coup d'etat was a masquerade," opposition leader Evans Paul said.
The former Port-au-Prince mayor's party headquarters were destroyed Monday for the third time in 10 years by Aristide supporters seeking revenge after armed men stormed the National Palace before dawn.
Aristide was not at the palace early Monday morning, when authorities say 33 heavily armed men shot and killed two police officers and took over one wing of the building for seven hours before they fled.
Two passers-by were shot by fleeing attackers.
Aristide, in what he called a "message of peace" following the violence, said Monday: "We have thwarted the coup, but it's not all over."
Paul, who was Aristide's campaign manager in 1990 but now leads an opposition party, pointed to what he called the "absurdity" of 33 men attacking the palace, which is guarded by hundreds of police officers.
He also said it is widely known that Aristide rarely spends the night there.
Authorities said one of the attackers was killed in a gunbattle at the palace in central Port-au-Prince and a wounded gunman was captured at a roadblock near the border with the Dominican Republic.
The rest escaped.
Aristide said police had made "a strategic retreat" to allow the attackers to get away so they could "snare them in a fish net."
Aristide became Haiti's first freely elected president in 1990 but was ousted by the army in 1991 after eight months in office despite protests by thousands of people who took to the streets to protect their new democracy and president.
Aristide loyalists, who spoke to The Associated Press on condition of anonymity, acknowledged that demonstrations Monday in response to the violence at the National Palace weren't spontaneous.
They said pro-Aristide organizers told them Sunday night, hours before the attack, that something was happening and that they should mobilize.
In the hours after the palace attack, hundreds of Aristide supporters surrounded the building armed with machetes, sticks and revolvers.
Some set fire to opposition offices and the homes of opposition leaders around the country.
They killed at least two people.
On Tuesday, banks and schools reopened, street vendors returned to their stalls and Haiti's international airport reopened, but the border with the Dominican Republic remained closed.
Streets in the capital still smelled of smoking tire barricades set up by Aristide supporters.
Aristide said police were searching for dozens of conspirators.
Palace spokesman Jacques Maurice said the attackers wore the khaki and camouflage fatigues worn by the army that Aristide disbanded in 1995.
Haiti has been plagued by eight major revolts and thwarted or successful coups since 1986, when the Duvalier family was ousted in a popular uprising after a 29-year dictatorship.
After the 1991 coup, Aristide spent three years in exile before President Clinton sent 20,000 troops to restore him to power.
In 1996, he stepped down because of term limits and was replaced by his protege.
In November 2000, Aristide was re-elected following disputed legislative elections earlier in the year that led the international community to freeze most aid.
He took office in February.
The United States appealed Tuesday to the Haitian government and opposition parties to reach agreement in their long-running conflict over election issues.
State Department spokesman Richard Boucher condemned the raid on the palace and the mob violence that followed, saying it "underscores the need for dialogue and reconciliation among all elements of Haitian society."
Dec 16?A ship carrying U.S. chicken arrived in Cuba on Sunday, completing the first direct food trade between the two politically estranged countries since the United States slapped an embargo on the Communist-run island in 1962.
The historic sales, prompted by Hurricane Michelle, which devastated the Caribbean island's crops last month, were the result of a year-old law that exempts food and medicine from U.S. trade sanctions.
The M.V. Express, a container vessel owned by Florida-based Crowley Liner Services, glided into Havana Bay with 500 tonnes of frozen chicken sold by a U.S. subsidiary of the French firm Louis Dreyfus Corp.
A second ship carrying 24,000 tonnes of corn sold by U.S. agribusiness giant Archer Daniels Midland arrived later in the day.
"It is our hope that these initial sales to Cuba will serve the purpose of proving the point that it is a logical thing for Cuba and the United States to trade with one another," ADM executive Larry Cunningham said as the Crowley ship docked across Havana Bay.
"It is our feeling the best way to build relations between countries is to have them become trading partners," Cunningham added.
Both vessels left the United States on Friday, with more shipments expected in the coming weeks as ADM and others make good on about $30 million in contracts for 200,000 tonnes of U.S. wheat, corn, soybeans, rice and chicken.
The sales come despite Cuban President Fidel Castro's pledge not to buy "a single grain of U.S. rice or aspirin" soon after the new law was signed.
He claimed that it discriminated against Cuba because the United States still prohibited private and government financing, as well as the import of Cuban products.
But Castro apparently changed his mind after Hurricane Michelle ripped across Cuba.
The sales were expected to heighten debate in the United States between farmers and others who want the embargo lifted, and Cuban exile groups who demand even tougher sanctions.
Pedro Alvarez, president of state-run Alimport, which made the purchases, seemed to hope they would do just that.
"U.S. producers do not have markets for all their products and Cuba is a secure market," Alvarez said.
"This has an impact.
American food producers are learning a Cuban market exists, that it is a market that wants products, and a market they are losing because of U.S. laws," he added.
President George W. Bush has said he strongly supports the U.S. trade embargo against its neighbor 100 miles (160 km) south of Florida, but moves are under way in the U.S. Congress to further loosen the sanctions.
U.S. agribusinesses have voiced hope for additional sales to Cuba, which purchases some $800 million in food commodities each year.
But Castro last week attributed the sales to damage caused by Hurricane Michelle, saying he wanted further changes to the embargo before engaging in more trade.
"It's a one-off sale," the veteran Cuban leader told reporters on the Venezuelan tourist island of Margarita during a summit of Caribbean leaders.
Castro said it was impossible for Cuba to accept the idea of what he called "unilateral trade" in only one direction.
"But we don't want to pronounce the last word on this," Castro said.
"If there are gestures from their side, there will be gestures from us in this business of trade," he added.
Just when the Afghan war may seem to be ending, some experts believe it is entering the most dangerous phase for U.S. troops.
In the weeks to come, military analysts and Afghanistan specialists predicted yesterday, U.S. soldiers will have to pursue members of Osama bin Laden's al Qaeda network and their Taliban allies through booby-trapped caves and remote areas strewed with land mines.
"I think there's a lot more danger" to U.S. forces now that they are operating as frontline troops, said Alexander Thier, former head of the U.N. humanitarian office in Kabul.
"You're going to have more incidents like the Marine casualties in Kandahar," he added, referring to the wounding of three Marines on Sunday when one tripped a land mine.
"The fact of the matter is . . .
there are still any number of al Qaeda" in Afghanistan, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said yesterday while flying to a NATO meeting in Brussels.
"There are still a lot of Taliban in the country, and they are still armed.
And it is going to take time and energy, and people will be killed in the process of trying to find them and capture them, or have them surrender.
"
Some experts believe that Afghan fighters have done about as much as they are willing or able to do in pursuing members of the al Qaeda terrorist network, and that U.S. and British soldiers will have to carry out many of the risky searches in the final phase of the war.
Some American Special Operations troops were searching caves yesterday with Afghan fighters, a U.S. official said.
This week, for the first time in the war, U.S. military operations are more ground- than air-based.
The war will go on for some time, a senior U.S. official said yesterday.
But in the coming weeks, he said, "it won't be so much B-52s anymore."
A Pentagon official added, "As this whole thing starts to wind down on the ground, the need for that [air] capability will lessen."
Although it is too soon to say whether many warplanes will be recalled from the war, he said, "to have a whole bunch of bombers loitering in the air 24 hours a day --
I just don't see the need."
U.S. officials said yesterday they do not know bin Laden's general location.
Bin Laden's organization is accused of plotting the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on New York and Washington.
"A few days ago, we believed he was in Tora Bora, and now we're not so sure," Rear Adm. John D. Stufflebeem said at a Pentagon briefing, referring to the cave complex near the Pakistani border.
"Maybe he's been killed or has left."
The United States is gleaning less battlefield intelligence from intercepted radio conversations among al Qaeda fighters, reflecting the likelihood that many have been killed or have fled, he added.
"We get all kinds of reports -- that he's in a cave, that he's not in a cave," President Bush said yesterday, summarizing the search for bin Laden.
"There's all kinds of speculation, but when the dust clears, we'll find out where he is, and he'll be brought to justice."
Some military experts said the United States cannot leave the vital job of pursuing bin Laden and other al Qaeda leaders to Afghanistan's opposition Eastern Alliance, Pakistani border guards or anyone else.
"Surrogates may not have the same goals we have," said retired Army Brig.
Gen. Huba Wass de Czege. "
Will the Afghan Eastern Alliance troops be as willing to risk lives to capture bin Laden as our own troops would?
"
"We are going to have to go into those mountains and kill him," military historian Williamson Murray said.
"And I think that we need to use U.S. and allied troops to do that nasty business."
Not everyone agreed that mopping up al Qaeda will be difficult and dangerous.
Ali Ahmad Jalali, a former member of the Afghan resistance who has written several books on Afghanistan's wars, said the "phase of direct fighting is probably over."
He said al Qaeda has so few supporters in Afghanistan that U.S. forces will be kept busy just reacting to a torrent of tips from Afghans about the whereabouts of al Qaeda fighters.
Members of bin Laden's network, many of them Arabs who stand out as distinctly foreign in insular Afghanistan, "have very few friends and a very high profile," and so are likely to be identified and apprehended quickly, Jalali added.
He and others said they were more worried by the threat posed to Pakistan's stability by al Qaeda fighters who may have slipped out of Afghanistan to hide in refugee camps and Islamic seminaries.
Surrounded by sympathizers in Pakistan, they might form new anti-American organizations, Jalali suggested.
"That's the real danger."
Al Qaeda probably can operate better in Pakistan -- especially in the unruly border region -- than in Afghanistan, said Thier, the former U.N. official.
"Kidnappings and snipings and attacks on U.S. personnel, and on U.S. relief workers, are more likely to occur in Pakistan, especially in the tribal areas, than in Afghanistan," he said.
The senior U.S. government official said the Bush administration shares those concerns and is considering ways to assist Pakistan, including more extensive intelligence-sharing and other steps to "help the Pakistanis build security."
In short, the next few months in Afghanistan may be far more difficult for the United States than the last two have been, said Harlan Ullman, a defense analyst at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
In addition to pursuing al Qaeda and Taliban members, he said, the U.S. government and its allies must address a host of other issues, such as averting widespread starvation this winter, bolstering a shaky new government in Afghanistan and dealing with potential instability in Pakistan.
"This isn't the beginning of the end," Ullman said.
"It's the end of the beginning." 
Staff writer Marc Kaufman contributed to this report. 
Washington Post reporter Steve Vogel covers local and regional military issues.
His Military Matters column runs every other week.
Washington Wizards majority owner Abe Pollin said the long-suffering franchise likely will turn a profit this season, largely based on a projected run of continued sellouts at the 20,674-seat MCI Center.
"If we continue selling out games, for the first time in many years, I will not lose any money and maybe make a few bucks," Pollin said yesterday, without discussing exact figures.
"We would make some money but, as I've said many times before, I'm not in this business strictly for the financial end of it.
If I wanted to be in the business for financial reasons, I'd go back to building buildings like I used to do."
Washington leads the 29-team NBA in attendance, selling out all 10 of its home games.
Tonight's game against the visiting Atlanta Hawks also is expected to be a sellout even though there are a limited number of seats available.
The Wizards also have sold out every road game, a luxury for Pollin's fellow owners, some of whom are having problems filling seats on a regular basis.
Should the Wizards advance to the playoffs, "We'd probably make some more money," Pollin said.
Pollin, 78, said he won't consider selling his majority interest in the team unless it wins a title.
Pollin, who has a 56 percent stake of the Wizards, is in his 37th year owning the team -- the longest tenure of any NBA owner.
Lincoln Holdings, headed by Washington Capitals owner and AOL executive Ted Leonsis, controls the remaining interests.
"There is no way I'm prepared to sell the team," Pollin said.
"The only time I would consider selling it is if we win a championship.
If and when that happens, I would only think about selling it.
Up until then, as long as the good Lord is good to me, I'm going to be with this team while we fight to win another championship." 
The draw for the Wizards, of course, is Michael Jordan, who came out of a three-year retirement this season at age 38.
This summer, mere speculation of Jordan's return led to Washington selling more than 14,500 season tickets before the opening game.
"We sell the place out because of Michael but now people are getting very excited about the team," Pollin said about the red-hot Wizards, who have won six consecutive games. "
Now this is a team.
It's not just Michael.
Michael is a fantastic draw and player but now [fans] see this team is winning and they see potential for a very exciting and competitive team.
"I predicted we'd be in the playoffs back at the beginning of the year and people laughed at me.
They probably will still laugh at me when I say I still believe we'll make the playoffs.
That's okay."
Before coming out of retirement, Jordan spent the previous 19 months as part owner and president of basketball operations for the Wizards.
Jordan owned 10 percent of the team, although his shares came from Lincoln Holdings.
To conform to NBA rules, Jordan had to sell his interest back to Leonsis and abandon his role as the team's top basketball executive once he returned as a player.
As president of basketball operations, Jordan made personnel moves that trimmed about $7 million off the team's payroll, bringing it to about $52 million this season -- another reason the Wizards could finish the season in the black.
Pollin said he isn't keeping as much an eye on the bottom line as he is on the improvement of a franchise that, under his ownership, won a title in 1978 but hasn't won a playoff game since 1986.
Washington last advanced to postseason in 1997, when Jordan's Chicago Bulls swept the then-Washington Bullets in the three-game first round.
The Wizards are off to their best start since the '97-98 season.
"I always felt that this team, once it starting clicking together and learning how to play with Michael, would be a very competitive team," Pollin said.
"It took a while but our young players are starting to play together and play like they're capable of playing.
"Our veterans are playing well.
Popeye Jones is great and Richard [Hamilton] is playing wonderfully.
After losing eight games in a row and now winning six in a row, that's a tremendous turnaround."
Pollin said first-year Wizards coach Doug Collins is a key reason for the change.
"He's doing a great job," Pollin said of Collins.
"We had a team dinner [Monday] night and the assistant coaches who know Doug well gave a lot of credit for what's going on to Doug.
The players have finally inherited his passion for hard work and he's taught them how to fight hard and play defense.
He's a very knowledgeable basketball man and I'm very lucky to have him."
When Philadelphia wide receiver
Todd Pinkston and Washington Redskins rookie cornerback Fred Smoot both played college football in Mississippi, the two established a bit of a friendship, working out together on several occasions.
That familiarity produced some potent trash-talking yesterday at FedEx Field.
Pinkston, who attended Southern Mississippi, got the last word in the Eagles' 20-6 win:
He caught a 62-yard touchdown pass -- his longest reception of the season -- with 8 minutes 37 seconds left in the third quarter that gave first-place Philadelphia a 17-6 lead.
Pinkston's grab was the second longest gain the Redskins have given up this season.
"I'm telling him he's not getting anything today
and he got the long catch and came back in my face and said it ain't over," said Smoot, who played a half-hour from Pinkston at Mississippi State.
On first and 10 from the Philadelphia 38-yard line, Eagles quarterback Donovan McNabb faked two handoffs and then pumped right.
Smoot took the bait, which gave Pinkston, running a post pattern from the left side, time to get open.
McNabb connected with Pinkston, who dodged safety David Terrell and evaded Smoot to find the end zone.
"I think that set the tone for the game," Pinkston said.
"I just got behind the defense, Donovan had a good throw and the [offensive] line gave him some time."
Said Smoot: "You could say it was directed at me, you could say it was directed at somebody else, but point blank
they tricked us.
That was a mental mistake.
"Any time the quarterback gets that much time -- the receiver ran like a 40-yard route -- he's going to run away from you, point blank," Smoot said.
"I went down and left the lane open, and once I saw what they were doing, I got there late."
It was about the only time Smoot's coverage broke down.
In the second quarter, he broke up two consecutive passes in the end zone.
But the Eagles' offense eventually got the best of him.
McNabb's command was far better yesterday than in the teams' last meeting on Nov. 25 when the Redskins won 13-3 by containing McNabb.
But yesterday, McNabb went 16 of 34 for 235 yards and two touchdowns.
"We hit them with a fake reverse and were able to have them sit and watch and try to guess," McNabb said.
"Todd ran the post, and I was able to get the ball to him.
He did an excellent job of avoiding tacklers and walking in the end zone."
Pinkston has not been the Eagles' main go-to receiver this season; he ranks third on the team in receptions behind former Redskin James Thrash and Duce Staley with 35 receptions for 435 yards.
But that didn't matter against his friend Smoot, whom Pinkston burned for 77 yards and the game's defining play.
"It was the back-breaker," Pinkston said.
"We know their safeties are aggressive, but once I got behind their defense, everything just fell into place."
For the Baltimore Ravens, the significance of tonight's AFC Central Division showdown with the Pittsburgh Steelers at PSINet Stadium is straightforward.
A victory would give them a chance at catching the Steelers for the division lead.
A loss may well eliminate their slim hold on the AFC's top wild-card spot.
"It couldn't be better," Ravens Coach Brian Billick said.
"Pittsburgh's the best team in the AFC right now.
Home-field advantage [in the playoffs] riding on it.
The whole nine yards."
The Steelers have a one-game lead over the Miami Dolphins of the AFC East and the Oakland Raiders of the AFC West in the race for home-field advantage throughout the conference playoffs.
They have a two-game lead over the Ravens , and a victory tonight would give them their first division title in four years.
But the Ravens beat the Steelers six weeks ago, so winning this and their next three games coupled with another Pittsburgh loss would lift them to the division title.
Both teams are similarly constructed, as each focuses on defense and running the football, and they expect to meet a third time in the postseason.
"It'll be a straight-up, punch-in-the-face, let's-go-at-it kind of game," Ravens defensive tackle Tony Siragusa promised.
Billick isn't totally convinced, based on some deception the Steelers have shown under new offensive coordinator Mike Mularkey.
"We will see," he suggested, "a fake field goal, a fake punt, an onsides kick, a double reverse pirouette, put it between your knees and shoot it out your mouth.
You name it.
Probably, [wide receiver] Hines Ward will be their leading ball carrier and 'The Bus' will be their leading passer.
We'll be ready for it all."
The Steelers say "The Bus," aka 255-pound tailback Jerome Bettis, is unlikely to play because of a hip/groin injury that kept him out of their 18-7 victory over the New York Jets last week.
If Bettis is sidelined, it will be the first time in his nine-year career that he would have missed back-to-back games.
"I'm looking at more than just" this game, Steelers Coach Bill Cowher said.
"Certainly, if this was a playoff game and there was a chance of there being no tomorrow, we'd have to reevaluate that decision."
If Bettis does not play, Chris Fuamatu-Ma'afala will start and Amos Zereoue will have more playing time than usual to help counter the Ravens' speed.
Without Bettis, the Steelers still rushed for 134 yards against the Jets.
One of the defensive stalwarts for the Ravens, tackle Sam Adams (knee), did not take part in the three rigorous practices this week but still was listed as questionable.
The Ravens have not permitted a 100-yard rusher in their last 49 games, although Bettis had 91 on 23 carries during the 13-10 Baltimore victory in Pittsburgh.
That suggests the keys for the Steelers will be quarterback Kordell Stewart and place kicker Kris Brown, who missed four field goals in the earlier game.
Referring to Stewart's ability to run, Ravens middle linebacker Ray Lewis said, "He's a guy who literally puts the game in his hands."
The Ravens will offer another quarterback this time for the Steelers -- Elvis Grbac, who has been more consistent the last two games after four interceptions during a home loss to the Cleveland Browns.
Backup Randall Cunningham replaced the injured Grbac in Pittsburgh and completed 14 of 22 passes for 158 yards and a touchdown.
He was intercepted once.
"Their front seven is very good, and there aren't too many holes overall," Grbac said of the Steelers' defense. "
But there are some things they do in certain formations with safeties that we can key on."
As House-Senate negotiations to reach a compromise economic stimulus plan teeter on the edge of failure, Democrats and Republicans are preparing arguments that an agreement could have been reached if only the other side hadn't proven so inflexible.
Republicans, led by the White House, say Senate Democrats have failed to pass a stimulus bill and pursued a blatantly partisan approach that was doomed to failure.
The White House stresses that it has worked with centrist Democrats to devise a package with bipartisan support.
Democrats say Republicans have pushed ideas that violate the guidelines accepted by all sides in meetings with President Bush and congressional leaders.
Democrats assert they have shown great flexibility in negotiations and that it is Republicans who have been unwilling to bend because of ideological concerns.
Only in Washington could such starkly different perspectives emerge from repeated meetings and negotiations, even in the aftermath of Sept. 11 and countless pledges of bipartisan cooperation.
The gulf between Democrats and Republicans on economic issues is so wide -- and the scar tissue from past battles so deep -- that compromise appears all but impossible.
House Republicans and the White House yesterday sought support from moderate Democrats, sweetening some key provisions in an effort to pass a new version of a stimulus bill today or tomorrow.
That bill will probably die yet again in the Senate because it will not win the 60 votes necessary to overcome procedural hurdles, just as Democrats could not overcome those same hurdles to pass a bill with a simple majority.
If no stimulus package is approved before the holidays, both sides will be able to point to missed opportunities, misunderstandings and cold political calculations as the reason for failure.
A big part of the problem is that, on economic issues, Republicans and Democrats do not appear to speak the same language.
Frequently in the past three months, officials left a room thinking they had an agreement, but in reality participants heard only what they had hoped to hear.
Both sides, for instance, cite the "principles" for stimulus established by the president and congressional leaders, but they offer different interpretations of what they mean.
Some of that may be because their goals are so divergent.
Republicans have pushed tax cuts for businesses and individuals, but Democrats complain that Republican objectives -- such as repeal of the corporate minimum tax -- violate the agreement that any stimulus should be temporary.
Democrats have stressed aid for the unemployed, including assistance with health insurance premiums, that Republicans regard as permanent expansions of government spending programs.
Personality conflicts -- such as the Democrats' disdain for the abrasive chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, Rep. Bill Thomas (R-Calif.) -- have added another hurdle.
"It is very, very, very difficult," complained Sen. John D. "
Jay" Rockefeller IV (D-W. Va.), one of the three Senate negotiators. "
Thomas talks between 80 to 90 percent of the time at our meetings."
Efforts to bolster the economy after the Sept. 11 attacks started with a burst of bipartisan goodwill.
Bush met repeatedly with congressional leaders to devise a common framework, and both sides agreed that time was of the essence.
White House aides say they would have preferred to push cuts in corporate tax rates, but instead accepted Democratic suggestions to allow companies to write off investments more quickly and also to provide rebates to workers who earned too little to qualify for last summer's tax cut.
House Republicans eventually persuaded the president to accept a more partisan approach, and he approved their plan to pass their own bill packed with tax cuts for corporations and individuals.
It passed by a margin of two votes, with almost no Democratic support.
The House bill then complicated matters in the Senate because, in addition to the individual and corporate tax cuts, it included the previously negotiated rebate checks for workers and write-offs for business investments that Democrats had sought.
The president "bargained some things away and [put] some things in that I didn't like," said Senate Minority Leader Trent Lott (R-Miss.).
Republicans say Democrats have just pocketed these concessions and have not reciprocated, but Democrats respond that these provisions were accepted by all sides in high-level talks.
Senate Democrats, meanwhile, have pressed ahead with a big package to aid the unemployed, citing the advice of Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan and former treasury secretary Robert E. Rubin that lawmakers needed to find ways to help boost consumption.
In response to the House action, Senate Democrats assembled their own bill with no Republican input.
But Republicans blocked it on the Senate floor, invoking a procedural rule requiring 60 votes for passage when the Democrats could muster only a bare majority of 51 votes.
Democrats said they since have backed off their insistence on $15 billion in spending on homeland security, accepted the idea of a health insurance tax credit rather than direct premium payments to the unemployed, agreed to a small cut in individual tax rates and to a repeal of parts of the corporate minimum tax.
They also are prepared to drop the idea that people who leave their jobs voluntarily can qualify for the tax credit.
The White House, for its part, has backed off full repeal of the corporate minimum tax, boosted its spending package for the unemployed and dropped some of its rate cuts -- though House Republicans are not necessarily in full agreement.
But these apparent concessions weren't enough to appease the other side -- and any further movement would run the risk of losing support for a deal among partisans.
The structure of the health insurance tax credit, for instance, has become a key roadblock to a deal, with philosophical differences, not money, making agreement impossible.
Republicans want the tax credit to go to individuals; Democrats would like to keep it rooted in the current employer-based system, in which workers who lose their jobs can continue to buy insurance through their previous employer.
The underlying ideological difference concerns whether health insurance should be primarily bought by individuals or should continue to be offered mostly through employers.
A White House official said the administration was willing to increase funds available for health insurance assistance if Democrats agreed to the Republican proposals to target the credits to individuals.
Rockefeller said he told Thomas he would accept the GOP structure -- "which I have spent a lifetime fighting" -- if the GOP promised to cover everyone who applies for health insurance, ensure comprehensive benefits and charge affordable premiums.
Thomas said that was tantamount to price controls, which he could never accept.
Washington Redskins cornerback Darrell Green is likely to overturn his decision to retire following the season and might announce within the next few days that he intends to return next year for a 20th season, sources close to the situation said yesterday.
Green, 41, said he intended to discuss the issue with his wife, Jewell, last night and make a decision "real soon."
He indicated last week he is considering a return because so many fans have urged him to come back.
There were several banners at FedEx Field urging Green to return yesterday as the Redskins lost to the Philadelphia Eagles, 20-6.
"I've got to do it quick," said Green, who announced his retirement on Sept. 4.
"I have to move one way or the other.
I have time-sensitive issues for myself. . . .
I'm going to put a real focus on that starting [last night].
I owe it to myself.
I owe it to my family.
I owe it to the organization.
I need to move forward."
It was an active day for Green, who suffered a shoulder injury and surrendered a touchdown pass but persevered to get his first interception of the season.
That extended his NFL record to 19 straight seasons with at least one interception.
"I'm not one who really rides off that stuff," he said.
"But fortunately, when you play 19 years, you have a chance to get some records. . . .
I do appreciate them, but I appreciate them in the privacy of my own basement at home."
One source said earlier yesterday it was virtually certain that Green would return and an announcement probably will come soon.
According to the source, the exact timing of the announcement was not clear, but Tuesday is a possibility, barring a last-minute snag or a change of heart by Green.
Tuesday is the weekly day off for the Redskins players.
Another source said later that Green's return was likely and an announcement could come today.
Green and the Redskins apparently would like to resolve the matter before they would have to begin making preparations to stage a farewell game for Green.
If Green sticks to his retirement plan, his final regular season game is scheduled for Jan. 6 against the Arizona Cardinals at FedEx Field.
Green said his decision would be made before the end of the season.
"The community has responded to my commitment to them," he said.
"That's what made me look at this.
The doors are open.
I'll try to move quickly to determine that.
I have a life, and I have a vision for my life."
The fans' sentiment was clear yesterday, with several banners hung at FedEx Field imploring Green to come back. "
Don't Go, Darrell!"
one sign said.
Another read: "Make It 20 Years, No. 28!"
The crowd cheered loudly and chanted Green's name when Green walked off the field after suffering a pinched nerve in his left shoulder trying to make a tackle on a first-quarter play.
He returned to the game and was covering Freddie Mitchell when the Eagles' rookie wide receiver made a tumbling catch for a four-yard touchdown reception from quarterback Donovan McNabb in the second quarter.
Green had tight coverage, but Mitchell made his first NFL touchdown catch anyway.
In the fourth quarter, though, Green stepped in front of Eagles wideout Na Brown and grabbed a McNabb pass for his first interception of the season.
Federal health officials yesterday began urging Capitol Hill workers to take an as-yet unlicensed anthrax vaccine as part of a plan sparked by fears that deadly spores may be lurking in the employees' bodies and could erupt once antibiotic treatments end.
Two military anthrax experts met with about 70 staffers to outline the rationale for the unprecedented inoculation proposal, which could involve as many as 3,000 Senate and U.S. Postal Service employees in Washington, New York and New Jersey.
Health officials are anxious to begin the vaccinations as soon as possible because many of the 10,000 Hill staffers and postal workers who had been put on 60 days of antibiotics after the bioterrorism attacks this fall have begun finishing their courses.
That means they could be at risk of falling ill soon if anthrax spores are lingering in their lungs and their immune systems have not been primed to respond.
Officials want vaccinations to begin this week after Health and Human Services Secretary Tommy G. Thompson approves the plan.
Health officials said they began briefing the Capitol Hill workers first because Hill officials specifically requested that they do so.
They said they would be available to brief all employees who would be affected by the plan.
But the plan is already generating controversy and confusion.
District health officials are unconvinced the vaccination is necessary, but at the same time, they are concerned that not enough vaccine may be available for everyone at risk.
The vaccine itself is controversial because the company that makes it has had a long history of problems and has yet to receive final approval by the Food and Drug Administration.
"There are only 10,000 doses of the latest batch of vaccine -- and that is the lot that the Capitol Hill physician has requested," said Larry Siegel, Washington's deputy health director.
"We have made it very clear that if it is released, we want access to the same lot."
Siegel contested claims from federal officials that only 3,000 people were at high enough risk to need the vaccine.
"There's no science yet that will allow anybody to make a determination that any of the 3,500 people in Brentwood [postal facility] are at any lower risk than the people in the Daschle suite," he said.
"If anybody is going to be offered vaccine, everybody should."
On Capitol Hill, a Senate aide said the 90-minute briefing was calm and informative.
The group was told that "extensive studies" of the anthrax vaccine showed no serious side effects, although the three injections can be painful.
Lt. Col. John Grabenstein, head of the anthrax vaccine program at the Army surgeon general's office, said vaccinations of 524,000 military personnel had found only low risks such as sore arms, aches and fevers.
Combining vaccine with antibiotics is the "best insurance" against developing anthrax, Grabenstein said.
The Senate staffers considered most at risk are those who worked in the sixth- and fifth-floor offices of Senate Majority Leader Thomas A. Daschle (D-S.D.), which received a letter laden with anthrax spores in October, and the adjoining fifth-floor office of Sen. Russell Feingold (D-Wis.), as well as other officials who visited there after the tainted letter was discovered, said Greg Martin, chief of infectious diseases at the National Naval Medical Center.
For congressional staffers who did not come in direct contact with the tainted letter, officials will offer the vaccine but not necessarily recommend it, Martin said yesterday.
The first Capitol Hill staffers exposed to anthrax spores are completing their allotted 60 days of treatment.
Postal workers considered most at risk are those who worked with the four employees who developed inhalational anthrax, those in buildings where tainted letters were opened and those with positive nasal swabs, officials said.
Postal spokeswoman Kristin Krathwohl said no decision about the vaccination plan had been made by the Postal Service or unions.
"It's an area that few of us know anything about," said Barry Burns, chief shop steward in the motor vehicle section of the Brentwood facility.
"The only thing we can do is put our trust in [the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention].
We have very little trust of postal management and what the post office was telling us.
As of yet, we have no reason to distrust CDC."
For months, health authorities have been publicly advising people exposed to anthrax to take only the two-month course of antibiotics to protect themselves from developing the life-threatening disease.
But at a meeting Saturday, officials disclosed that two weeks before the first letter arrived, senior government physicians on Capitol Hill had met with officials from the FBI, the CIA, the Justice Department and several other agencies to prepare for an anthrax emergency.
"We all agreed" that anthrax vaccinations combined with antibiotics would be the collective approach, said John Eisold, the physician for Capitol Hill.
But when the anthrax scare began Oct. 15 and thousands of workers in the Senate and at postal facilities were declared at risk, there was not enough vaccine available to immunize everyone.
"The ramifications of the actions that I would take on the Hill were far broader than I had originally anticipated," Eisold said.
The government doctors scuttled their plan, which would almost certainly have been criticized for giving vaccines preferentially to lawmakers and powerful people over mail carriers.
So instead, only antibiotics were recommended for everybody.
About a month ago, the CDC quietly laid the foundation for a vaccination program by filing a request for an experimental program with the FDA -- a necessary step because the proposed vaccine had not passed all the agency's licensing requirements.
At the time, the CDC said the vaccine was being stockpiled for health officials who would have to respond to future bioterrorist attacks, and possibly for use in people for whom antibiotics did not work.
The Defense Department subsequently released some vaccine stocks to the CDC, making it possible to inoculate about 3,000 people.
Over the last few weeks, decades of anthrax research on animals and a recently declassified Canadian study reminded doctors that taking people off antibiotics for 60 days could leave them defenseless afterward against anthrax spores that lay dormant in their lungs.
When the medicine is stopped, the spores could germinate, producing disease. 
The vaccine has not received final FDA approval because the company that has an exclusive contract to make it for the military, BioPort Corp. of Lansing, Mich., has had a series of problems.
As a result, the new inoculation plan is formally being classified as experimental.
The vaccine has been generating controversy for years because of its use by the military to protect soldiers against possible biological weapons.
Some soldiers refused to get vaccinated, saying they were concerned about the vaccine's safety.
But health officials maintain that the vaccine has been shown to be safe.
The holdup with the FDA's final approval has been over BioPort's manufacturing facility, not the vaccine itself, officials said.
Staff writers Avram Goldstein, John Lancaster and Rick Weiss contributed to this report.
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld today proposed reducing NATO forces in Bosnia by a third next year, saying the peacekeeping mission there is placing a strain on the United States and other NATO members "when they face growing demands from critical missions in the war on terrorism."
Addressing defense ministers at the start of a two-day meeting at NATO headquarters focusing on the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, Rumsfeld said the alliance's 19 member nations need to spend more on defense and prepare for a number of new "asymmetric" threats, such as cyberwar and terrorists armed with chemical, biological or nuclear weapons.
"It should be of particular concern to all of us," Rumsfeld said, "that the list of countries which today support global terrorism overlaps significantly with the list of countries that have weaponized chemical and biological agents, and which are seeking nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and the means to deliver them."
Opening the session, Rumsfeld reminded his counterparts that he had warned them during his last trip here to prepare their forces for surprise threats that were difficult to imagine, let alone defend against.
"Sitting around this table six months ago, not one of us imagined that, by the time we would next meet, the World Trade towers would lie smoldering, the Pentagon would have come under attack, coalition forces would be at war in Afghanistan and, for the first time in the history of this alliance, Article V of the NATO Charter would have been invoked."
Article V, invoked on Sept. 12, one day after the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington, holds that an attack on one NATO country is an attack on the alliance as a whole.
Rumsfeld noted that the provision, designed to guarantee American defense of Europe in the event of an attack by the Soviet Union, was put into force so Europe could help defend the United States.
His comments on terrorism were echoed by NATO Secretary General George Robertson, who told reporters after formal talks concluded that the alliance is helping fight the war against Osama bin Laden's al Qaeda network and is committed to extending the reach of its forces beyond Europe.
"The North Atlantic Treaty Organization has an impressive record," Robertson said.
"We are at this very moment running three major and successful peace support operations in the Balkans, we're pursuing an ambitious enlargement agenda, we're engaged in a development of a broader, deeper relationship with Russia, and under Article V of the Washington treaty, we're making a significant contribution to the international campaign against terrorism."
But Robertson said NATO nations are not spending enough on defense and noted that "major deficiencies and major shortfalls" exist in the alliance's implementation of the Defense Capabilities Initiative.
The program was created after NATO's successful 1999 air campaign in Kosovo to close the yawning gap in military capabilities between the United States and its NATO partners.
"The simple message from the defense ministers of NATO today," Robertson said, "is this: You can't get defense on the cheap."
Asked whether any NATO members had expressed concern about the United States' desire to expand its war on terrorism beyond Afghanistan, Robertson said the issue never came up, and he made it clear that NATO considers itself a partner in the global campaign.
Senior U.S. defense officials said that with 18,000 peacekeepers in Bosnia, 3,100 from the United States, Rumsfeld's proposed reduction could reduce the force by about 6,000 troops.
If applied proportionately to all nations' forces, the officials estimated, about 1,000 Americans could go home -- or depart for more pressing overseas assignments.
There are 57,000 peacekeepers in Bosnia, the Serbian province of Kosovo and Macedonia, 8,800 of whom are Americans.
A British proposal under consideration to create a unified command in the Balkans could bring about additional reductions, U.S. and NATO officials said.
On the issue of increased NATO cooperation with Russia, afinal communique issued by the defense ministers endorsed a proposal known as "NATO at 20" to "give new impetus and substance" to the nascent relationship.
With NATO nations and Russia now meeting as a body called the Permanent Joint Council, the relationship encompasses, among others things, cooperation on counterterrorism and on peacekeeping in the Balkans, where Russian troops are among the NATO-led force.
Rumsfeld also endorsed greater "practical cooperation" between NATO and Russia.
But he made it clear that the expanding relationship would have clear limits.
"Our goal should be to find concrete ways for NATO to work together with Russia where interests coincide," Rumsfeld said.
"But at the same time, NATO membership must mean something.
And NATO must protect its prerogatives of independent decision and action among the 19 signatories. . . .
No country should be treated as a de facto member of the alliance, or given privileges that are otherwise denied to NATO aspirants."
The communique confirmed that the heads of state of NATO nations would begin the next round of NATO expansion in November 2002 in Prague, with nine nations applying for membership.
One NATO source said that one to five nations could get in, with Slovakia and Slovenia considered front-runners.
Other possibilities are the three Baltic states, Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia.
Rumsfeld, addressing his counterparts, said NATO's solidarity under Article V is the principle that will carry the alliance "into the new millennium.
"
"We are an alliance of democracies, and it is democracy that is under attack," he said.
"The terrorists struck us because of what we represent: freedom, religious tolerance and justice."
Washington Post reporter Steve Vogel covers local and regional military issues.
His Military Matters column runs every other week.
The United States is entering a new phase of the war in Afghanistan now that the partnership with Afghan fighters has all but broken the Taliban and al-Qaida as organized fighting forces.
It has become a manhunt, "step by step, cave by cave," as one U.S. general put it Tuesday, to find Osama bin Laden and his closest allies, with or without Afghan help.
The United States also has pledged to hunt down Mullah Mohammed Omar, the Taliban leader who harbored bin Laden for five years.
This final phase of the war is likely to feature less U.S. bombing, and action on the ground will no longer be focused mainly on territorial gains.
U.S. bombers and strike aircraft flew over Afghanistan as usual Tuesday, but the Pentagon said far fewer bombs fell.
A new political ingredient could affect the military campaign, too: On Saturday a provisional government takes power in Kabul, the capital.
The vanguard of a British-led international security force is expected to be in place there by then, but it will not immediately move beyond the capital.
The U.S. military focus now is twofold:
Interrogating al-Qaida and Taliban prisoners for information useful in the hunt for bin Laden and Omar, and scouring the final major battlefield, in the Tora Bora mountain region of eastern Afghanistan, for fleeing enemy troops and clues to bin Laden's whereabouts.
The Bush administration still holds out hope that $25 million in reward money will help.
The shooting war is not over.
On Tuesday, the 73rd day of the U.S. military campaign, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said the United States will not let up. "
The task is still ahead of us," he said, and it will not be accomplished quickly.
"It's going to be tough, dirty, hard work."
Air Force AC-130 gunships, for example, are ready for U.S. forces to fire cannons, howitzers and Gatling guns on any Taliban or al-Qaida troops spotted fleeing the Tora Bora region.
U.S. surveillance planes are scouring that area, and special operations troops are still on the ground.
Much of the emphasis now, however, is on squeezing as much useful information as possible from the prisoners who have been captured in Afghanistan and Pakistan.
Some are being screened by U.S. officials and a small number have been transferred to American control.
It's unclear what that implies for the future of the partnership between U.S. and Afghan tribal forces.
Together they defeated the Taliban and expelled the al-Qaida.
From the Afghans' point of view, that amounts to victory.
The United States, however, sees it only as a step toward getting bin Laden.
One of the next steps is searching the Tora Bora caves abandoned by al-Qaida in recent days.
Marine Corps Gen. Peter Pace, vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said Tuesday the search may be long.
"It's going to be step by step, cave by cave, and to put a time limit on that would be imprudent right now," he said.
The United States also has pledged to get Mullah Mohammed Omar, the Taliban leader who seemed to vanish when the southern city of Kandahar fell to opposition fighters more than a week ago.
Paul Wolfowitz, the deputy secretary of defense, told a Pentagon news conference Tuesday that the United States has even less reliable information about Omar's location than it has about bin Laden.
"It's been longer since we've seen even what sounded like convincing secondhand reports, much less firsthand reports," he said.
One report, from a tribal intelligence officer, said Omar had fled to Baghran, in the foothills of the south-central mountains, with 300 to 400 fighters.
Mountain ranges riddled with caves begin in a northwest corner of Kandahar province and run northwest to Baghran.
Baghran is a gateway to the unguarded northern frontier and Turkmenistan, a notorious smugglers' track toward the breakaway Russian republic of Chechnya, where bin Laden's support remains strong.
Wolfowitz stressed more than once at his news conference that the war on terrorism was far from over.
Dec. 17 ?
Britain will contribute up to 1,500 troops to an international peacekeeping force in Afghanistan and is willing to command the unit, Prime Minister Tony Blair told Parliament today.
The announcement signals that a long-stalled effort to deploy an international force is back on track.
If the U.N. Security Council approves a peacekeeping resolution soon, the first British soldiers could be in the country by Saturday, Blair said, when the interim Afghan government is due to take office.
Britain is pressing the council to vote by the end of the week.
"There has been a brilliant victory over the Taliban," the prime minister said.
"But we know that is only the start of enabling Afghanistan to cease being a failed state and become a responsible partner in the region."
Last week representatives of about a dozen countries that might contribute to the force met in London.
The participants included France, Germany, Italy, Canada, Australia, Jordan, Malaysia and Turkey.
But many details remain undecided, including the force's size and leadership.
James F. Dobbins, special envoy to Afghanistan, said in Kabul Sunday that the United States would provide logistical and intelligence assistance but no combat soldiers to a peacekeeping force.
If Britain takes the lead role, the overall command role will likely fall to British army Maj.
Gen. John McColl, who traveled to Kabul over the weekend to make plans for a possible deployment.
As prime minister of a nation that fought two major wars in Afghanistan and ruled it briefly in the 19th century, Blair has said he feels a responsibility to help Afghans build a stable government for their war-torn nation.
But the formation of this "stabilizing force" has not been a particularly stable process.
A month ago, Blair talked about sending 5,000 British troops.
But after the first 300 soldiers arrived in the country, the Northern Alliance, the opposition group that captured Kabul, bluntly told London that no more British forces would be welcome.
Even now, some alliance leaders are dragging their feet, saying their own fighters can keep order and that at most 200 peacekeepers will be needed. "
Foreign peacekeeping troops will be unacceptable to our people," Sayed Najibullah Hashimi, an aide to Northern Alliance leader Burhanuddin Rabbani, said today.
Other leaders accept the idea.
"The people of Afghanistan want peace," said Yonus Qanooni, the alliance's interior minister.
"It will not be a problem to have a peacekeeping force in Afghanistan."
But the alliance continues to try to limits the force's authority.
Abdullah, the foreign minister, insisted in a recent letter to the president of the U.N. Security Council, Moctar Ouane of Mali, that the peacekeeping mission be authorized to use force primarily for self-defense.
Britain and other European countries want a much tougher mandate that would allow peacekeepers to use force to fulfill their mission.
U.S. officials, meanwhile, have expressed concern that a peacekeeping force might get in the way of offensive operations against remnants of the Taliban and al Qaeda.
The result of the debate is that the force will be smaller than originally conceived and its main job, at least at first, will be to patrol Kabul and to assure members of the new government that the city is not the domain of the Northern Alliance.
Beyond that, there appears to be little for a force to do in the capital.
Since the Northern Alliance moved in, the city has been secure, with none of the widespread looting or violence that many feared.
Blair's announcement today appeared to crack the multiparty consensus on Afghanistan in British politics.
Ian Duncan Smith, the former soldier who leads the Conservative Party, Blair's chief opposition, told Parliament he has "deep misgivings about British deployment on such a mission as peacekeeping."
The Conservatives warn that British soldiers in Afghanistan could become targets of Taliban fighters or sympathizers wanting revenge.
To hone that concern, there was news today that a British soldier on peacekeeping duty in Pristina, the provincial capital of Kosovo, had been killed by sniper fire.
Correspondents Peter Baker and Kevin Sullivan in Kabul and special correspondent Colum Lynch at the United Nations contributed to this report.
Congress gave final approval Tuesday to the major education overhaul sought by President Bush, providing more money for local school districts and insisting on higher achievement in return.
For millions of students, it will mean new annual math and reading tests.
The Senate vote, 87-10, marked a final bipartisan flourish for the most sweeping overhaul of federal education programs since the Great Society more than three decades ago.
The House approved the bill last week on a vote of 381-41.
Bush hailed the vote on an issue he made a centerpiece of his campaign for the White House last year.
"These historic reforms will improve our public schools by creating an environment in which every child can learn through real accountability, unprecedented flexibility for states and school districts, greater local control, more options for parents and more funding for what works," he said in a written statement.
Bush expects to sign the measure into law early next year during a bipartisan victory lap through the home districts of the legislation's chief sponsors, including Democrat Sen. Edward Kennedy, GOP Sen. Judd Gregg and Rep. John Boehner, R-Ohio.
The measure gives states and school districts more freedom over how they spend federal dollars, but requires them to raise student achievement, monitor teacher quality and close the gap between poor and middle-class students and white and minority students.
"School improvement and school reform are not optional, they are mandatory," said Kennedy, D-Mass., one of four key lawmakers who shaped the measure.
Gregg, R-N.H., added, "What we're doing is creating opportunities for local school districts, states and especially parents, to take advantage of using their federal dollars in a more effective way of educating the low-income child."
Several lawmakers, including Sen. James Jeffords, I-Vt., have complained that the $26.5 billion plan falls short by not giving schools enough money, especially for costly programs to help disabled students.
Jeffords, who headed the Senate's education committee until he left the Republican Party last May, joined six Democrats and three Republicans who voted against the bill.
Beginning in the 2005-2006 school year, schools would be required to test every student in grades three through eight in reading and math each year.
For the first time, the scores would affect how much federal funding a school gets and how school officials can spend it.
Schools with persistently low test scores would get extra federal funding, but low-achieving poor students could ask that part of a school's federal allotment be spent on tutoring or transportation to another public school.
Schools could be freed from such provisions only if the scores of students of all racial, ethnic and economic groups improve.
They would have 12 years to get all students reading and doing math proficiently, but could be given more time if they show slow, steady progress.
Schools would have to send annual "report cards" showing a school's standardized test scores compared to others locally and statewide, as well as how many teachers are qualified to teach in their subjects.
In what might seem unthinkable, schools would have to send a note home to parents if a student is taught by a teacher without required qualifications, such as a social studies teacher teaching a math class.
Such requirements have soured support for the bill among groups representing school administrators and school board members, who say their strapped systems would be burdened more than ever.
The testing provisions alone are expected to cost billions, they say, with the bill providing only a fraction of that.
National School Boards Association lobbyist Reggie Felton said the new requirements will be difficult to fulfill.
"We believe that our schools will want to make the changes, will want to accommodate the law, but will simply be strained due to increasing costs to provide services to students with disabilities," he said.
Amy Wilkins of the Education Trust, a Washington group that advocates for urban and minority students, said the provisions for children in struggling schools represent a sea change in national education policy.
"It recognizes for the first time that there are actual kids moving through these systems, who need help now," she said.
"They can't afford to wait."
She also said the ambitious testing requirements may be painful to school districts, but in the end will help them spend their money more wisely.
"This will give educators at the school and district level lots more data to make informed policy and budget choices," she said. '
"Is it math or reading
that's a problem?
Is it third-grade or fourth-grade math?'
This is going to give them data that they should be smart enough to use."
Amgen Inc. scheduled a conference call with investors this morning to announce it is buying Immunex Corp. of Seattle for approximately $16 billion in cash and stock, a deal that would marry the nation's largest biotechnology company with its fastest-rising star.
A source said negotiations were concluded successfully over the weekend and an announcement will go out before the stock market opens this morning.
The source, who was not directly involved in the negotiations but had secondhand knowledge, did not know the exact mix of cash and stock in the deal but said the cash portion would be less than 20 percent.
The deal includes the 41 percent of Immunex owned by American Home Products Corp., a stake valued at more than $6 billion.
The deal may raise some antitrust concerns because Immunex sells a minor drug that competes with one of Amgen's drugs.
The deal requires approval from shareholders.
Wall Street has reacted skeptically to the idea of an Amgen buyout of Immunex, with the big company's shares falling 13 percent last week on news of buyout talks.
Pushing the deal through will be a major sales job for Kevin Sharer, Amgen's chief executive.
The main prize for Amgen, of Thousand Oaks, Calif., is an Immunex drug called Enbrel, whose sales could exceed $3 billion by 2005, equal to the combined sales of Amgen's two biggest drugs. 
The source said Amgen was likely to keep most of Immunex's1,500 employees, effectively turning the Seattle company into a branch research laboratory.
It was unclear last night whether the deal transfers to Amgen any of the rights held by American Home Products Corp. to market Immunex drugs.
If it does not, Amgen and AHP, of Madison, N.J., would likely wind up as business partners.
The deal is by far the biggest move to date for Sharer, who took charge of Amgen in mid-2000 with a mandate to shake up the company.
Amgen has grown into a biotechnology powerhouse on the strength of two drugs, Epogen, for anemia related to kidney failure, and Neupogen, for cancer complications, but has not delivered a major new product in recent years. 
Amgen recently won approval to sell Aranesp, a replacement for Epogen, but some of the company's most ambitious research plans have yielded little.
In particular, Amgen paid millions for rights to a protein called leptin that may play a role in regulating body weight, but research has not yielded much promise for leptin as a fat-busting drug.
Immunex has had some notable product failures, too, but Enbrel, an injectable drug used to treat rheumatoid arthritis, has been a roaring success.
The drug has sharply improved the lives of many debilitated arthritis patients for whom all other treatments had failed, and patients have clamored for it even at $12,000 a year per person.
Revenues from the drug could hit $750 million this year.
The source said the deal was seen as a strategic marriage that will help both companies accomplish their goals faster.
Sharer is betting he can beat Wall Street's projections for Enbrel sales, while Immunex executives are excited about the prospect that Amgen's resources will let them bring some new drugs to market faster, the source said.
The National Transportation Safety Board is investigating whether a rudder problem caused a United Airlines Boeing 737 to suddenly bank while descending for a landing in Chicago last week.
The plane landed safely.
Rudder problems on 737s are suspected in two deadly U.S. air crashes in the early 1990s.
Last month, the Federal Aviation Administration proposed requiring airlines to install new rudder control systems on 737s, the world's most popular commercial jets.
The rudder is the flap on the vertical tail of the aircraft.
Moving the rudder left or right causes the plane to turn in that direction.
The pilots flying United Airlines Flight 578 from St. Louis to Chicago's O'Hare International Airport last Thursday afternoon reported the plane's nose suddenly swung to the left and right when the aircraft began descending at around 9,000 feet, FAA spokesman Paul Turk said Monday.
The pilots disconnected the autopilot and the plane then banked sharply, Turk said.
They had to apply pressure on the rudder pedals to level the wings and regain control.
After the plane touched down, the pilots said the rudder swung left and then fully to the right, causing a loud bang, Turk said.
The plane stopped safely and all 93 passengers got off without incident.
spokeswoman Lauren Peduzzi said investigators checked the plane during the weekend and are studying its flight data recorder and cockpit voice recorder.
"We're still reviewing all the data to see exactly what caused the incident," said Peduzzi, who described it as a "rudder anomaly.
"
Boeing spokeswoman Liz Verdier said a number of factors could have been responsible, including the aircraft itself, the pilot or the weather.
"We don't know what that anomaly is," she said.
Verdier said Boeing considers the incident serious and would consider checking its entire fleet if the NTSB investigation indicates it could be more than an isolated occurrence.
United spokesman Joe Hopkins declined to comment.
Boeing announced in September that it would train pilots in how to handle jammed rudders and would begin installing new rudder systems on 737s in 2003.
The FAA's rudder proposal would give the airlines five years to install the new systems.
The FAA estimates that 2,000 U.S. airplanes would have to be refitted, at a cost of $364 million.
The FAA is seeking public comments for 60 days before issuing the new directive.
The NTSB blamed rudder problems for a US Airways crash outside of Pittsburgh in 1994 that killed 132 people and a United Airlines crash at Colorado Springs, Colo., in 1991 that killed 25.
Amgen Inc.'s rise into the world's largest biotechnology company was fueled by two drugs: Epogen, used to treat anemia, and Neupogen, used to reduce infection in chemotherapy patients.
On Monday, the firm was expected to announce it will add three more blockbuster drugs to its roster with the purchase of rival Immunex Corp. for $16 billion in stock and cash.
Published reports say Amgen will pay $14 billion in stock and about $2 billion in cash, valuing Immunex at about $30 a share.
Shares of Immunex closed at $25.62 Friday.
The combined market capitalization of both companies is about $72.5 billion.
South San Francisco-based Genentech, Inc., the second largest biotechnology company, has a market capitalization of $28 billion.
The planned deal is the latest in a flurry of announced biotechnology mergers.
Two weeks ago, Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc. announced it would buy COR Therapeutics for $2 billion and MedImmune Inc. said it planned to buy Aviron for $1.3 billion.
The latest deal, if approved by regulators, would give Amgen of Thousand Oaks control of three big-selling drugs, including Seattle-based Immunex's rheumatoid arthritis drug, Enbrel.
Enbrel is expected to account for about $750 million in sales this year and could reach $4 billion annually by 2005, according to Immunex chief executive Edward Fritzky.
American Home Products Corp. of Madison, N.J., owns 41 percent of Immunex's publicly traded stock and has agreed to the takeover, according to reports.
American Home Products also shares significantly in sales of Enbrel.
Since gaining Food and Drug Administration approval in 1998, Enbrel sales have been hampered by production capacity, a problem analysts say Amgen might be able to alleviate with its 12 years of manufacturing experience, analysts said.
On the other hand, the analysts said the deal will hurt Amgen's ambitious growth goals in the near term.
Amgen had expected to grow earnings by 20 percent annually.
The Food and Drug Administration last month approved Amgen's own rheumatoid arthritis drug, Kineret.
But clinical studies showed Kineret to be less effective than Enbrel and it wasn't expected to outsell Enbrel.
Analysts said the two drugs could be sold together.
"There is a synergy there," said Fariba Ghodsian of Roth Capital Partners in Los Angeles.
"Immunex's sales force is more experienced with rheumatoid arthritis than Amgen's."
Immunex's two other big drugs are Leukine, which stimulates infection-fighting white blood cells, and Novantrone, which kills cancer cells and reduces inflammation that contributes to worsening forms of multiple sclerosis.
Amgen's two flagship drugs accounted for a combined $3 billion in sales last year.
Epogen had $1.9 billion in sales last year.
Neupogen accounted for $1 billion in sales last year.
Amgen shares Epogen revenues with Johnson Johnson of New Brunswick, N.J. under a 16-year-old arrangement.
Amgen received FDA approval for Epogen competitor
Aranesp earlier this year and hopes the new drug, which it owns exclusively, will ultimately outsell the older drug.
The deal also is a major strategic departure for Amgen, which has been satisfied to grow internally and through small acquisitions such as its $170 million purchase of Kinetix Pharmaceuticals last year.
Analysts said Amgen's Kevin Sharer, who was named chief executive last year after serving eight years as company president, is putting his own stamp on the company.
Amgen, launched in 1981 with 20 workers, now employees 7,000 worldwide.
It went by the name Applied Molecular Genetics and experimented with genetically engineered dyes, detergents and animal growth hormones.
Much of that work went nowhere and the company teetered on bankruptcy until one of its scientists in 1983 cloned the protein erythropoieten, better known as Epogen.
The FDA approved Epogen in 1989.
Was Enron's failure caused by bad luck, incompetence or greed?
Were illegal or criminal actions involved?
Where were the company's directors while this was happening?
How much did they profit from it?
Were they kept in the dark by senior executives?
What was the role of Enron's longtime auditor, Arthur Andersen LLP?
Were the accountants duped or were they incompetent?
Wasn't it a conflict of interest for the accounting firm to depend on Enron for tens of millions of dollars in consulting contracts, in addition to its auditing work?
What about the federal regulatory agencies, such as the Securities and Exchange Commission?
Did they miss signs of trouble at Enron?
Did financial analysts who kept issuing "strong buy" recommendations for Enron stock know what they were doing?
Did they have a conflict of interest because of their investment firms doing financial work for Enron?
A survey of analysts' recommendations on Nov. 29, the day after Enron's share price fell from around 60 cents to about 40 cents, found six "strong buys" for the stock, two "buys," six "holds," no "sells" and one "strong sell."
NATO Secretary General George Robertson is in Moscow hoping to mend fences, and he's been presented with plans for a shield. 
In a meeting with Russian Defence Minister Igor Sergeyev, Robertson was presented with a counterproposal to U.S. plans for a national missile defence system (NMD). 
The Russian plan is tactical in nature, on a smaller scale than the all-encompassing proposal U.S. President George W. Bush is calling for.
It would also put more emphasis on evaluating individual threats and political efforts than on military hardware. 
Russia and China have both expressed concerns that implementing the NMD would create a gap in nations' capabilities and launch a new arms race. 
It would also undermine the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile treaty, which has been a cornerstone of nuclear stability for nearly 30 years.
Russia says its proposal wouldn't do that. 
Robertson's visit to Moscow is intended to warm relations that have been icy since the NATO air campaign in Kosovo two years ago. 
He will open a NATO information office at the end of his trip. 
The two sides will also discuss the issue of NATO's expansion into the Baltic states, something Moscow strongly opposes. 
And he has been confronted by anger over last Friday's bombing raids in Iraq.
Robertson has stressed those were American and British actions, not NATO, but many in Russia see them as just another example of Western aggression. 
Written by CBC News Online staff
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
FINAL AMERICAN LEAGUE EXPANDED WIN-LOSS ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
TEAM DAY NIGHT GRASS TURF ONE-RUN
EXTRA LAST10
----
-------
-------
-------
-------
-------
-------
------
ANAHEIM 19-27 56-60 68-82 7-5 24-24 7-8 1-9 BALTIMORE 20-32 43-66 52-84 11-14 16-27 5-6 3-7 BOSTON 27-24 55-55 64-72 18-7 19-23 6-8 6-4 CHI WHITE SOX 39-38 44-41 78-69 5-10 22-22 7-4 4-6 CLEVELAND 26-25 65-46 80-65 11-6 25-18 9-6 4-6 DETROIT 22-40 44-56 62-85 4-11 14-21 3-7 4-6 KANSAS CITY 20-30 45-67
59-86 6-11 11-24
6-7 6-4 MINNESOTA 28-28 57-49 37-37 48-40 25-19 8-7 5-5 NY YANKEES 40-26 55-39 81-54 14-11 30-18 8-8 6-4 OAKLAND 35-23 67-37 93-54 9-6 21-19 7-7 8-2 SEATTLE 36-13 80-33 106-44 10-2 26-12 9-4 8-2 TAMPA BAY 33-43 29-56 18-48 44-52 17-19 5-5 7-3 TEXAS 20-21 53-67 66-82 7-7 19-22 5-8 3-7 TORONTO 24-33 56-49 30-31 50-51 28-21 10-6 6-4 Broadcast 10-08-01 01:28
Prime Minister Jean Chr tien said while he cannot promise the war on terrorism will be painless, Canada has readied troops to support the United States. 
The prime minister made the comments Sunday afternoon during U.S. and British air strikes against Taliban targets in Afghanistan. 
Chr tien said last Friday evening, Bush asked Canada to make "certain contributions" to the multinational military coalition against terrorism. 
He said he immediately agreed, and ordered the minister of national defence to agree.
He then met with the Chief of National Defence Staff to confirm the role that Canadian forces would play. 
Shortly before noon Sunday, Chr tien spoke to Bush on the phone and confirmed that he would provide the support the U.S. requested.
He then issued a warning order to the defence staff for certain armed forces units to be ready. 
Chr tien said he would not provide any further information on the military action because it could endanger lives. 
The prime minister praised the Canadian military and said that they must be strong and vigilant. 
"All Canadians understand what is being asked of the men and women of our armed forces, as well as their families," Chr tien said.
"As always they are ready to serve, and as always they will do Canada proud." 
"We must insist on living on our terms, according to our values, and not on terms dictated from the shadows," he added. 
Chr tien also informed opposition party leaders Sunday afternoon that military action was imminent. 
Conservative Leader Joe Clark said he was pleased the prime minister called him. 
"That's the kind of co-operation within the Canadian family that is required," said Clark, noting he was glad Canada is playing a role in the effort. 
Although the prime minister did not release any details about Canada's role, Clark and Canadian Alliance Leader Stockwell Day shared some of what they were told.
Clark said Chr tien indicated Canada will offer communications support, while Day said he understands it will include ships and air transport. 
Written by CBC News Online staff
The United States is lobbying Canada and other allies to support the development of its National Missile Defence system. 
U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense John Hamre invited Canadian reporters to the Pentagon Wednesday and told them if Canada won't actively support NMD as it's known in defence circles it will find its role as a partner in NORAD significantly diminished. 
Hamre repeatedly told them the National Missile Defence system is not the discredited dream of Ronald Reagan's Star Wars. 
The new system is costly and still has many problems, but Washington appears committed to the program. 
Hamre said whether Canada likes it or not, building the missile defence system is official U.S. policy. 
NMD will be designed to protect the United States against missile attacks by rogue nations such as North Korea. 
Russia has warned that such a system could start a news arms race, a fear shared by some NATO allies who worry NMD will destabilize the current balance of nuclear power. 
That's why Canada is coming under such pressure, argues John Pike, a critic of missile defence with the Federation of American Scientists. 
"We don't need Canada from a geographical perspective, but we certainly need Canadian political support," said Pike.
"So getting Canada to go along with missile defence deployment through NORAD is going to be essential to persuading other countries like South Korea or Japan to join us and Russia and China not to oppose us." 
President Clinton is expected to make the final decision to build a missile defence system in June. 
His deputy secretary of defense said Clinton would like to know that Canada supports him. 
Written by CBC News Online staff
Canada's economy could slide into a mild recession because of this month's terrorism attacks in the United States, Bank of Canada governor David Dodge said Friday. 
But because there is so much uncertainty about what's going to happen in the next few months, he said it's impossible to predict with any confidence beyond the New Year. 
"Right now, it is difficult to look too far ahead in terms of the economic implications for Canada of last week's events," according to Dodge. 
"Nevertheless, economic growth in the third quarter will likely be close to zero or slightly negative, and we will continue to feel the adverse effects into the fourth quarter." 
Many economists define a recession as two or more consecutive quarters (six months) of negative real Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
Real GDP is a broad measure of economic output, including workers' incomes and companies' profits, that has been adjusted for inflation. 
Dodge told reporters it's "certainly possible" Canada could end up in this boat, but he cautioned that there's no way to know the extent of the drop in economic activity. 
Earlier in the day, the Conference Board of Canada released a report that also predicted the economy will stall, but it downplayed the chances of a "full-scale recession." 
The board said real gross domestic product (GDP) would probably fall to virtually zero in the third and fourth quarters of this year. 
"Although the damage was substantial, it is safe to say that the destruction and disruption can be managed successfully and will not be enough to drive either the United States or Canada into a full-scale recession," according to the report. 
"The terrorist attack should result in a Canadian economy that now demonstrates virtually zero growth in the last half of 2001, although a negative quarter will most probably be avoided, and thus even a mild recession is not in the cards," the Conference Board said. 
Industries expected to suffer most from the terrorist attacks include aviation, tourism, and general exports. 
Federal Finance Minister Paul Martin said Thursday that he's not certain how much Canada's contribution to the fight against terrorism will cost.
But for the first time in years, he's not ruling out running a deficit again. 
The conference board thinks real GDP in the United States will drop initially, but could turn up slightly by the end of this year.
More time, and statistics, are needed for an in-depth analysis, economists warned. 
In addition to the incalculable cost of lost lives, the damage to New York City's financial district is already estimated at $20 billion.
Lost economic output in the United States will probably add up to about $25 billion in September alone, according to analysts. 
"The entire (U.S.) economy came to a virtual standstill," Canada's Conference Board said.
Planes were grounded, many consumers reduced spending, and stock markets were closed. 
Although it's possible that increased spending by the Pentagon may give the U.S. economy a boost, analysts have said that too much of a jolt might cause chronic inflation. 
Transport Minister David Collenette said Thursday the federal government is still examining whether to offer a financial bailout to Canada's airlines. 
"I've said that we've got to get the facts, and if there is any assistance, we've got to make sure the taxpayers' money is justified," Collenette told reporters following Question Period. 
Earlier this week, Air Canada CEO Robert Milton said his company needs $3 billion to $4 billion to help it survive because last week's terrorist attacks have hobbled the airline and left travellers nervous about flying. 
On Thursday, Milton told a Montreal radio station that ticket sales at the airline are off 60 per cent since the attacks. 
Collenette said the federal government is looking at the economic impact of the terror attacks not just on Air Canada, but on the airline industry as a whole, including the country's other carriers and its airports. 
"Air Canada is not alone in this predicament.
I believe that Air Canada will get over this.
The question is how, in what way and what shape or form Air Canada will continue," Collenette said. 
There is also the question of whether economic help should be extended to other sectors affected by the fallout from the attacks. 
"As I said yesterday, where does it stop?
If we assist one industry, what do we do for other industries?"
Collenette said. 
He was due to meet Thursday afternoon with the Air Transport Association of Canada, which represents the country's commercial airlines. 
Air Canada has already cut its transborder schedule by 20 per cent, and layoffs appear likely. 
Canada 3000 president Angus Kinnear said Wednesday his airline too wants financial support from the federal government. 
"If the passenger loads continue to erode, if public confidence isn't restored, I don't think there will be an airline in existence if we don't take a broad view of what the short term is and what the long term is," Kinnear said Wednesday. 
However, one Canadian airline said Air Canada shouldn't get a big bailout of taxpayer money. 
WestJet Airlines CEO Clive Beddoe on Wednesday said that instead of being bailed out by Ottawa, Air Canada should instead cut back its operations because the Canadian airline sector is faced with overcapacity. 
U.S. airlines have already announced thousands of layoffs and cuts in service since the attacks on Sept. 11. 
U.S. Transportation Secretary Norman Mineta has said the White House will propose a plan that includes $3 billion US for security improvements and $5 billion US in direct payments to airlines. 
<!
------------------------START
MAIN COPY HERE------------------- <!
-----------------------START
PICTURE
TABLE-------------------
he United States' plan for a national missile defence (NMD) system seems like nothing more than a dream.
Technologically it would be an amazing feat, essentially eliminating the threat of nuclear attack.
But politically it could be a disaster.
The object of the NMD system is to give the U.S. the power to protect itself from incoming ballistic missiles, whether launched by accident or as an attack from so-called "rogue states."
The system would also protect other countries, such as Japan which lies within striking distance of North Korea.
However, countries like Russia and China warn that creating a missile defence system would destabilize the current balance of nuclear power by giving the Americans the upper hand, and that could start a new arms race.
Others say the end of the Cold War marked the end of the need for defence systems the likes of President Ronald Reagan's Star Wars project.
<!
-----------------------START
PICTURE
TABLE-------------------
Russia also said it wasn't going to cut back on its strategic nuclear missiles if the United States violates the Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) treaty.
The 1972 treaty, in which the two countries agreed not to develop missile defence systems, is credited for what has been almost 30 years of nuclear stability around the world.
In January 1999, the Russian Nezavisimaya Gazeta newspaper said the NMD system was an attack on Russia that aimed at "overcoming the last remaining barrier to American world domination.
" 
ashington assured Russia it had nothing to worry about.
The system is intended to protect against possible threats from countries such as Iraq, Iran and North Korea.
North Korea already has weapons that can reach Japan and is believed to be ready to test a Taepodong-2 missile that could travel as far as Alaska or Hawaii.
In fact, at one point President Bill Clinton threatened to veto the NMD bill unless certain changes were made, including affirming a U.S. commitment to working with Russia to reduce weapons.
The bill was amended and in March 1999 was passed in the Senate by a vote of 97 to 3.
In February 2001, Russia presented NATO with a counterproposal to the U.S. plan, one that would be tactical in nature and that would put the emphasis on evaluating individual threats rather than on military hardware.
Russia says its proposal would leave the ABM treaty intact.
However, Washington has proposed the treaty be amended so the NMD project can go ahead.
Russia and China aren't alone in their objections.
Nearly every non-nuclear state at the United Nations is opposed to the American plan.
anada has yet to officially say where it stands on the issue, neither denouncing the technology nor declaring its undying support.
However, Foreign Affairs Minister Lloyd Axworthy spoke out against it at a United Nations conference in April 2000.
He said a missile defence system could threaten international security and damage the nuclear non-proliferation treaty.
<!
-----------------------START
PICTURE
TABLE-------------------
"Why make a decision on a highly expensive, unproven arms system that could have major repercussions on the broad arms control regime when there are other options?"
Axworthy said later when speaking to reporters.
"There are ways of dealing with these matters multilaterally."
Canada's opinion may not seem to matter all that much.
The Americans don't need Canada geographically (the U.S. would already have North America covered and Canada certainly poses no nuclear threat) and they hardly need our permission.
But analysts say the U.S. would likely find it more difficult to persuade countries like South Korea or China to support the project if it doesn't even have the support of one of its friendliest neighbours.
The U.S. has been lobbying Canada &#150 along with all NATO countries &#150 for support.
In March 2000, Canadian reporters were invited to the Pentagon by U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense John Hamre.
They were told if Canada won't actively support America's National Missile Defense system, it would find its role as a partner in NORAD significantly diminished.
Still, Canada has limited its participation to research and consultation with the U.S. and other countries to understand how the technology would work and how it would be used.
If a missile defence system does become a reality, Canada doesn't want to be left in the dark.
espite the political problems, its seems that the biggest obstacle preventing the NMD system from becoming a reality is the fact that the technology just doesn't work, well not yet anyway.
When the U.S. announced its intention to develop a Ronald Reagan Star-Wars-like defence system in February 1996, the plan was to have the technology working by 1999 and the system deployed by 2002.
Of course that didn't happen.
The U.S. national missile defence system would be composed of two main elements.
Ground systems and satellites would provide an early warning system, allowing the U.S. to detect missiles soon after they're launched.
And a battery of "kill missiles" would give them the ability to intercept and destroy the incoming missiles.
But the NMD system is turning out to be one of the most complex weapons ever designed, so complex some say it will never work.
Every test of the technology so far has failed.
In January 2000, the U.S. military conducted a mock nuclear attack.
A Minuteman intercontinental ballistic missile, designed to carry a nuclear warhead, was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California.
Twenty minutes later, another smaller missile was launched from the Marshall Islands about 7,000 kilometres away.
The second missile was supposed to hit the first, but it missed.
They tried again in July, but again the target was missed.
One military official described it as trying to hit a bullet with another bullet. 
The repeated failures are certainly bad news for U.S. military officials who hope to gain support from the international community.
And it doesn't leave them with much of a defence against critics who say the $700 million US project is a waste of taxpayers' money and the funds should go towards social programs instead. 
<!
-----------------------START
PICTURE
TABLE-------------------
The Pentagon had extended its deadline for deployment of the NMD system to 2005, but in September 2000, President Clinton said he wasn't confident it would be ready in time.
It's now in the hands of his successor, President George W. Bush, who has said he would deploy a system like NMD "at the earliest possible date."
<!
-----------------------START
LINKS
TABLE-------------------
These are desperate times for the B.C. Lions. 
The defending Grey Cup champions are on a three-game losing skid and have only one win in their last six starts. 
The Lions 6-8 record leaves them hanging onto third place in the CFL West, one point behind the 6-9-0-1 Calgary Stampeders. 
But B.C. is also taking nervous glances at the 6-9 Toronto Argonauts who could cross over from the East and take that final playoff spot in the West. 
The Lions can barely afford any more losses but face a huge challenge Saturday night when they host the East-leading Winnipeg Blue Bombers who bring their 13-2 record and 11-game winning streak into B.C. Place (10:30 p.m.). 
"It starts here," said quarterback Damon Allen. 
"This game sets the tone for the rest.
Our backs are against the wall so we have no choice but to go out and be in a desperate situation. 
"We have to be desperate but confident, desperate but patient.
That's the mode of thinking you have to be in." 
Bomber quarterback Khari Jones, who spent his first three years in the league as Allen's understudy, is the CFL's leader in passing yards , touchdowns and interceptions . 
Behind his leadership, and the sure hands of receiver Milt Stegall, the offensive player of the week who leads the CFL with 11 touchdown catches, the Bombers have been playing confident football. 
They aren't blowing teams away -- seven of their last nine victories have been by five points or less -- but are finding ways to win. 
"Even though all the games we are playing are pretty close ... I felt like in the fourth quarter we had the ball most of the time
and we were able to make plays," said Jones. 
"If you keep doing it over and over, I don't think you can call it a fluke or chance.
It's a sign of a good team. 
"It's the ability to pull out the close ones that is making this team a quality team." 
In their last meeting, the Bombers beat the Lions 23-22. 
With seven seconds left, backup quarterback David Rivers mishandled a snap and kicker Matt Kellett missed on a potential game-winning field goal. 
Kellett said the miss isn't weighing on his mind. 
"There was no way I was going to be able to hit that field goal with circumstances that happened," he said.
"It wasn't meant to be." 
Injuries to players like Allen (broken left hand), wide receiver Alfred Jackson (out the last nine games with a knee injury) and slotback Darnell McDonald (returning this week from an Achilles problem) has hobbled the Lions offence. 
B.C. has scored 331 points this season. 
Only Hamilton and Saskatchewan have scored less. 
But what's really driven coach Steve Buratto crazy are the mental errors. 
The Lions have fumbled a league-high 31 times and turned the ball over on downs 11 times, more than anyone else in the CFL. 
B.C. has also been called for 147 penalties, third-most in the league. 
"We've committed some penalties which have put us in bad field position and taken things away from us," said Buratto. 
"Turnovers are a huge problem." 
If the Lions can stop shooting themselves in the foot, they can be a danger to other teams, Buratto said. 
"We can beat the Bombers," he said.
"What we need to do is go out and play with great intensity and intelligence and execute. 
"We do that, we have the skills to be successful.
Now we're just getting in our own way." 
H e a d l
i n e s :
PLANE CRASH MAY BE MILITARY ACCIDENT: U.S. A Russian passenger plane that crashed into the Black Sea Thursday may have been destroyed by a Ukrainian missile that went astray during a military training exercise, according to U.S. officials. 
There were at least 76 people on the Tupolev 154, which was en route from Tel Aviv to the Siberian city of Novosibirsk.
The plane was owned by Sibir Airlines.
Most of the passengers are believed to have been Israeli. 
After the explosion, Russian President Vladimir Putin suggested it may have been an act of terrorism. "
A civilian aircraft crashed today and it is possible that it was the result of a terrorist act," Putin told a meeting of European justice ministers in Moscow. 
Later, U.S. officials speculated the crash may have been caused by a deadly mistake during a military training exercise in Ukraine. 
It's believed that a land-based surface-to-air missile was fired from the Crimean region of Ukraine, according to a U.S. defence official, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Ukraine is thought to be the only country conducting military exercises around in the Black Sea. 
But Ukraine's defence ministry has rejected the accusation, saying none of its weapons could have hit a civilian aircraft.
Putin agreed with the assessment by the former Soviet republic. 
The plane crashed 175 kilometres from the Russian coastal city of Adler, according to Moscow. 
Garik Ovanisian, the pilot of a passing Armenian airliner, said the plane was overhead when it blew up. 
"I saw the explosion on the plane, which was above me at an altitude of 36,300 feet," Ovanisian told the Associated Press. "
The plane fell into the sea, and there was another explosion in the sea.
After that I saw a big white spot on the sea, and I had the impression that oil was burning." 
The Tu-154 is a commercial jet with three engines, capable of carrying more than 200 passengers.
More than 900 of them have been built since 1968. 
Take-offs from Ben Gurion International Airport in Tel Aviv were suspended for four hours but have since resumed.
With less than 48 hours until the softwood lumber agreement expires between Canada and the United States, chances of a last-minute resolution look increasingly slim. 
International Trade Minister Pierre Pettigrew told the House of Commons Friday that Canada would not negotiate a new pact with the U.S. by the March 31 midnight deadline. 
"The government of Canada will stand behind its industry and will challenge the wrong allegations of the U.S. producers that we are subsidizing," Pettigrew said. 
U.S. lumber companies are demanding protection.
They have complained the Canadian government unfairly subsidizes its lumber industry because the wood comes largely from Crown land, making it much cheaper. 
When the deal expires, softwood will be traded under the North American Free Trade Agreement, and cheaper Canadian wood is expected to flood the U.S. market but not for long. 
The U.S. industry plans to launch a legal battle to slap a steep border tax as high as 40 per cent in tariffs on Canadian shipments of softwood lumber. 
to argue its case before international trade panels.
"We are into a protracted fight and it's going to be an expensive one and the only people who are going to benefit out of that are going to be the trade lawyers," says B.C. Forestry Minister Gordon Wilson. 
Roughly $10 billion in softwood lumber is exported annually from Canada to the U.S., amounting to about one-third of the U.S. softwood lumber market. 
Written by CBC News Online staff
Reigning World Cup ski champion Janica Kostelic may have to postpone her planned comeback from injury and miss the North American leg of the women's races, her spokesman said Tuesday. 
Kostelic, who took the ski world by storm last year, clinching the overall World Cup title at only 19, was to return to the slopes and the World Cup at Aspen, Col. on Nov. 22-24 and then compete in Lake Louise, Alta.
, Nov. 29-30.
But the head of the Croatian Ski Federation, Vedran Pavlek, called that into doubt Tuesday. 
"We may have rushed her rehabilitation before, and so we are being terribly cautious this time," Pavlek said. 
Kostelic underwent her third surgery of the year in late September to remove damaged cartilage from her left knee.
Although her doctors predicted she could be back as early as the start of the season last weekend, Pavlek said the teen slalom sensation would not resume training until Monday. 
"Janica is desperately keen on skiing at least the slalom in Aspen," Pavlek said.
"But she still has minor tinges of pain, and we won't know anything for certain until she straps on her skis on Monday." 
In the worst-case scenario, Pavlek said, Kostelic would make her comeback in France at Val d'Isere, Dec. 5-17. 
H e a d l
i n e s :
The Big Unit finally showed he could win the big game. 
"I don't worry about that," Randy Johnson said after he clinched Arizona's first-ever trip to the World Series on Sunday night with a clutch seven-inning performance in a 3-2 victory over the Atlanta Braves. 
"I just go out and do the best I can all the time, including the post-season.
I didn't pitch that poorly.
It's just that those type of games get magnified," said Johnson, who had lost seven straight in the post-season before beating the Braves twice in the NL championship series. 
The Diamondbacks, with a three-game sweep at Turner Field, took the best-of-seven series in five games. 
Johnson allowed seven hits, two runs -- both earned -- walked two and struck out eight.
Byung-Hyun Kim pitched the last two innings for the save. 
Johnson's 118th and final pitch of the night turned out to be his best -- a nasty 2-2 slider that struck out Brian Jordan with two outs and the bases loaded in the seventh. 
"His tank was running low," teammate Luis Gonzalez said of Johnson, "but he did what he's done for us all year, he got the job done." 
The Braves had just gotten within 3-2 on Julio Franco's RBI single that scored Rey Sanchez, who had singled with one out and moved to second on a walk to Marcus Giles. 
After Franco's hit, Johnson walked Chipper Jones on a full count, loading the bases for Jordan. 
The count went to 2-2 -- four straight fastballs -- before Johnson fooled Jordan on the breaking ball, swinging at the low and inside pitch to end Atlanta's threat. 
"You could see Randy was tiring, that he had only one batter left in him -- Brian Jordan -- and he threw his best pitches of the night," Arizona first baseman Mark Grace said. 
"I laid it all on the line in the seventh inning and felt mentally spent after it was over," Johnson said.
"I pitched Chipper carefully.
I wanted to get him, but I'd rather pitch to Jordan.
No disrespect to Jordan, but I've had better luck against him than Jones." 
Jones was hitting .393 with six homers prior to Sunday night's game against Johnson, but went 0-for-3, reaching only on the full-count walk. 
Manager Bob Brenly told Johnson after the seventh that he was going to use Kim for the final two innings, which was fine with the big left-hander. 
"B.K. (Kim) stepped up and got the six hardest outs and the rest is history," Johnson said. 
Atlanta's only other run came on a solo home run by Franco in the fourth. 
The six-foot-10 left-hander kicked off Arizona's title run by dominating the Braves in Game 1 with a three-hit, 11-strikeout performance in a 2-0 victory. 
With the two wins over the Braves, Johnson shed the label of failing to win in the post-season, despite an ERA of 3.24 in 11 career playoff outings prior to Sunday night. 
Johnson is a leading candidate to capture his fourth NL Cy Young award -- and third straight -- after going 21-6 with a 2.49 ERA and 372 strikeouts during the regular season.
He closed out the regular season with his 200th career win in his final regular season start, a 10-1 victory over Colorado, giving him a career-high 21 wins. 
Until his success against the Braves, Johnson hadn't won in the post-season since the 1995 division series when he was with the Seattle Mariners, beating the New York Yankees for a 2-0 playoff record. 
He then dropped seven straight decisions, including a 4-1 loss to St. Louis in Game 2 in the first round of the playoffs this season, before turning it around. 
The 38-year-old Johnson is 4-7 in the post-season. 
His two strong performances against Atlanta made the four-year-old Diamondbacks the youngest franchise ever to make the World Series.
The Florida Marlins won the championship in 1997, their fifth season. 
H e a d l
i n e s :
Canada's veterans who think they were poisoned in the 1991 Gulf War and in the Balkans can't trust the government when it says they're fine, said scientists at an international conference. 
Many veterans think they are being made sick by their exposure to depleted uranium, a nuclear waste product found in some weapons used by NATO countries. 
The Department of National Defence says tests it performed show no contamination. 
But when CBC showed the test results to scientists at the International Conference against Depleted Uranium in Manchester, U.K. last week, they all said the testing was inaccurate and the results are useless. 
"They've not looked with the right instrumentation," said Dr. Malcolm Hooper, an adviser to Britain's Gulf War veterans.
"They've not reported accurately their own results and they've used the wrong paradigm to interpret the data." 
All of which is to say that the tests done on 85 urine samples &#150 which DND says show the soldiers had less uranium in their systems than people in the general population have &#150 are wrong from start to end. 
The labs doing the testing weren't properly equipped to detect depleted uranium at all, said Hooper.
Whole uranium occurs in the body naturally, and is easier to detect than depleted uranium. 
"They're incompetent tests," said Rosalie Bell, a Canadian epidemiologist.
"Our military men deserve better than that." 
Dr. Chris Busby, another epidemiologist from Wales, says the tests and their conclusions are being "economical with the truth." 
But that doesn't surprise Hooper, who says many governments are hoping to avoid the costs of providing compensation packages to people poisoned by depleted uranium. 
Written by CBC News Online staff
Curt Schilling became Curt Schilling in Atlanta. 
The year was 1993, Schilling, with the Philadelphia Phillies at the time, blocked out the deafening thump of the Atlanta's Fulton County Stadium's tomahawk chop and pitched eight shutout innings to help the Phillies past the Braves 4-3 in Game 1 of the NLCS. 
The Phillies would go on to win the series, ending Atlanta's quest for a third consecutive World Series appearance. 
Schilling would allow only three earned runs and struck out 19 in 16 innings over two games.
He was named series MVP without ever winning a game. 
To this day Schilling cites that experience in Atlanta as turning point in his career. 
"I think before that I was a loud nobody," said Schilling, who gets the ball for the Arizona Diamondbacks against the Braves in Game 3 of the NLCS on Friday. 
"Then I became a loud somebody." 
A somebody indeed. 
Since that series, Schilling has pitched three straight complete playoff games, including a five-hit shutout in Game 5 of the 1993 World Series against the Toronto Blue Jays. 
The right-hander pitched a three-hit shutout in the series opener and tossed a six-hitter in Arizona's 2-1 victory in the decisive fifth game. 
The only run he allowed against St. Louis was a solo home run to J.D. Drew in the eighth inning of Game 5. 
"We like our chances when (Schilling) takes the mound," D-Backs manager Bob Brenly said. 
"Whether it be the post-season or whether it be a regular season or a spring training game, we know we're going to get the same kind of consistent performance out of him.
We like sending him out there." 
Schilling threw seven scoreless innings in his only start against the Braves this season a 7-0 Diamondbacks win on Aug. 10 in Atlanta. 
Facing Schilling will be John Burkett , who will be making his first career start in the championship series and his third in the post-season. 
"We have a lot of confidence in Burkett going into the season.
Unfortunately, we didn't get him a lot runs.
He could have easily been a 15-20 game winner with some run support." 
Burkett allowed two runs and six hits in 6 1/3 innings, winning the clinching game of the Braves' three-game sweep of the Houston Astros in the division series. 
On April 27, against the D-Backs, Burkett tossed a three-hitter in a 9-0 victory.
The win was his first of the season and his only complete game. 
Burkett is 2-1 in four lifetime starts against Arizona. 
In Game 1 on Tuesday, Arizona's Randy Johnson snapped his seven-game post-season losing streak with one of his most dominating playoff performances in his career. 
After he surrendered a two-out base hit to Chipper Jones in the first inning, Johnson retired 20 straight batters. 
Tom Glavine followed Johnson's gem with one of his own in Game 2.
He allowed a run and five hits over seven innings as the Braves routed the Diamondbacks, 8-1 to even the best-of-seven series. 
H e a d l
i n e s :
When they needed it the most, Charles Roberts came through. 
Roberts broke open a tight game by returning a punt 58 yards for a touchdown early in the third quarter, then Eric Blount added a pair of late touchdowns as the Winnipeg Blue Bombers won their 12th consecutive game and dealt another blow to the B.C. Lions playoff hopes with a 26-18 CFL victory Saturday night. 
"They played good defence at the start and it took us a while to get going," said quarterback Khari Jones, who hit Blount with a 17-yard touchdown pass in the fourth quarter. 
"When we got going we got going pretty well.
Once we got that lead early in the second half everybody felt good about things." 
Blount also scored on a three-yard run late in the game as the Bombers improved their East Division-leading record to 14-2. 
Winnipeg set a club record for most consecutive wins, breaking the old mark which dates from the last week of the 1959 season through the first 10 weeks of 1960. 
"That's a great thing," said Jones, who completed 18 of 28 passes for 202 yards. 
"It's a great accomplishment.
We're still competing every week.
A lot of people said we might lay down for this game.
I don't think this team knows what's that like, not to compete." 
The loss was the fourth in a row for the 6-9 Lions who have lost six of their last seven games.
The defending Grey Cup champions sits third in the CFL West but could lose the last playoff spot to the Toronto Argonauts who have a 6-9-0-1 record for 13 points. 
Sean Millington scored on a one-yard run for B.C. in the first half.
On the last play of regulation time quarterback
Damon Allen threw a 35-yard touchdown pass to Jimmy Oliver.
Oliver also caught the two-point convert. 
"We didn't do much offensively," said a frustrated coach Steve Buratto. 
"The Bombers did a good job in the second half moving the football on us." 
The Lions had a punt return for a touchdown called back on a penalty. 
Slotback Geroy Simon also dropped a pass in the first quarter that could have resulted in a touchdown. 
Trailing 19-7 late in the fourth quarter, Buratto brought boos from the crowd of 23,510 when he elected to kick a 17-yard field goal instead of gambling on third down. 
The Lions led 7-2 at the half but Roberts put the Bombers ahead to stay early in the third quarter when he took a punt and rambled to the end zone, slicing through the B.C. defence like a hot knife through butter. 
Some heavy hitting in the first half took its toll resulting in almost as many injuries as points. 
The Lions lost running back Robert Drummond on the game's first series when he was crushed by Bomber linebacker Brian Clark as he tried to run around the end.
Drummond returned in the third quarter. 
Winnipeg linebacker Ryland Wickman was taken off the field on a cart with a knee injury and was taken to hospital for X-rays.
Milt Stegal, the Bombers leading receiver, left the game in the second quarter after taking a brutal hit from halfback Warner Herndon.
He spent the rest of the game on the sidelines in street clothes. 
The Bombers started the game with backup Brian Ah Yat at quarterback.
He completed five of nine passes for 32 yards before being replaced by Jones in the second quarter. 
If Toronto finishes with more points than the third-place team in the West Division, the Argos will cross over and take the final West playoff spot. 
Earlier Saturday the Calgary Stampeders defeated the Montreal Alouettes 29-9 to improve their record to 7-9-0-1 for 15 points and second place in the West.
Edmonton leads the division with a 8-8-0-1 record for 17. 
H e a d l
i n e s :
n January 17, 1991, at 2:38 a.m., the night skies over Baghdad were scorched with tracer fire as the first bombs of Operation Desert Storm hit the capital of Iraq.
It may have been early morning in Baghdad, but it was prime time in the West and the show had begun. 
It was the first war ever to begin live to camera, with one of the greatest beneficiaries being the cable network CNN.
When the war ended six weeks later, television host David Letterman remarked, "Finally we can go back to ignoring CNN."
Not so, it turned out &#150 Operation Desert Storm made CNN. 
Early thunder began the previous summer, on August 2, 1990, when Iraqi tanks rolled into oil-rich Kuwait in what turned out to be an almost effortless invasion.
The next day, the United Nations Security Council demanded an immediate, unconditional withdrawal of Iraqi forces from Kuwait. 
Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein was stunned by the vehement response.
He had expected a casual reaction from the West to his occupation of Kuwait, based on what U.S. ambassador April Glaspie had told him a week earlier, when she said, "We have no opinions on the Arab-Arab conflicts, like your border disagreement with Kuwait." 
Angry journalists confronted Glaspie, clutching copies of the transcript of her session with Saddam, accusing her of giving him carte blanche to take over Kuwait.
At one of these sessions a rattled Glaspie replied, "I didn't think . . .
the Iraqis were going to take all of Kuwait." 
Glaspie soon was removed from her post. 
he final statistics show the brief war killed more than 100,000 Iraqi soldiers, wounded another 300,000, with 150,000 Iraqi soldiers deserting and 60,000 taken prisoner.
The war claimed 148 American lives, another 458 were wounded, and 121 were killed in "non-hostile actions" &#150 victims of "friendly fire."
Eleven American women died in combat.
The cost of the war to the West has been estimated at between $63 billion and $72 billion US. 
Among the detritus of the sandy battlefield was 40 tonnes of radioactive depleted uranium from coalition weaponry.
Iraqi forces also left behind seven million land mines in Kuwait, which have killed nearly 2,000 people since the war ended.
Iraqi sabotage of Kuwaiti oil wells resulted in six to eight million barrels of oil spilling into the Persian Gulf, causing catastrophic damage to marine life. 
The U.S.-led forces arrayed against Saddam Hussein included soldiers from Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Britain, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Egypt, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Honduras, Italy, Kuwait, Morocco, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Korea, Spain, Syria, Turkey, and The United Arab Emirates. 
Coalition forces were said to number 540,000, pitted against &#150 first reports said &#150 432,000 battle-hardened Iraqi troops, many of whom were veterans of the eight-year war against Iran.
Turns out there were only about 362,000 Iraqi troops, and by the time the ground campaign began in February the Iraqi troops had dwindled to only 183,000. 
The previous September, with war fever heating up, Iraq's Revolutionary Command Council issued the memorable statement &#150 usually attributed to Saddam Hussein &#150 "This battle is going to become the mother of all battles." 
The propaganda war soon took over, when a teenaged Kuwaiti woman known only as "Nayirah" told a U.S. Congressional committee that she watched Iraqi troops rip respirators from premature babies in a Kuwaiti hospital, leaving the infants to die.
U.S. President George Bush often spoke of the villainy, talking of "babies pulled from incubators and scattered like firewood across the floor." 
No respirators were ripped from any babies in any incubators.
It was a fabrication to create loathing against Iraq.
Little "Nayirah" turned out to be Nayirah Sabah, the daughter of Kuwait's ambassador to the U.S.
Her visit to the congressional committee had been arranged by the U.S. advertising agency Hill & Knowlton. 
"It has been argued that the Gulf War was all about oil: Nobody would have gone to Kuwait's defence if it only produced carrots," London-based military affairs writer Gwynne Dyer said in an article in The Toronto Star in August, 2000. 
"Maybe so," Dyer continues. "
But it was also one of only two wars that have been fought explicitly to enforce the key (United Nations) rule that no border changes achieved by force are valid and that the UN can authorize willing member states to put the borders back where they belong." 
t can be argued that another legacy of Operation Desert Storm is that it created the impetus for the current Middle East peace talks. 
As Dyer argues, Palestine Liberation Organization leader Yasser Arafat believed Iraq would be allowed to keep Kuwait and that Saddam Hussein would share his new oil-money weaponry with the PLO.
It backfired when Iraq lost and Kuwait expelled its large Palestinian community.
Arafat then was forced by financial pressures to sign the Oslo accord, by which he agreed to negotiate a peace with Israel. 
Many of the sanctions imposed against Iraq as a result of the war still apply and are inflicting a heavy toll on ordinary Iraqis.
Technically, food and medicine are not subject to the sanctions, but the shortages of both these items are drastic in Iraq in 2001.
And the little things &#150 toys, lipstick, pencils, chocolate, school books, shoelaces, sanitary towels, even shroud cloth.
Two dozen eggs exceeds a university professor's monthly salary.
Some critics condemn the sanctions as a "silent holocaust," arguing Saddam Hussein is still capable of building new mansions, but those hit most brutally by the 10-year-old sanctions are the ordinary people.
After leaving his United Nations job as head of humanitarian relief in Iraq in 1999, Irish-born Dennis Halliday said, "We've got to classify sanctions as a form of warfare, given that they're producing 5,000 to 6,000 Iraqi deaths a month."
The glow has almost completely dimmed from the halo of Johann Muehlegg, the German-turned-Spanish skier who had been the hero of the Olympic cross-country competition, with news that the B sample of his urine test also came back positive.
The International Olympic Committee's medical commission released news of the result to Spain's state secretary for sport, Juan Antonio Gomez Angulo, on Tuesday.
"It's no surprise because, in reality, it's not a counter-analysis, but rather the same analysis from Feb. 21 done in the same laboratory by the same doctor and with the same system," Gomez Angulo told the Spanish national news agency, Efe.
Muehlegg won his third gold medal of the 2002 Salt Lake Winter Olympics by staging a stunning come-from-behind win in the marathon of the Winter Games, the men's 50-kilometre classical event, on Saturday.
A pre-event blood test revealed an illegally high concentration of red blood cells, which boost the blood's capacity to carry oxygen to muscles, but the red blood cell count was with legal limits in a subsequent test, and Muehlegg was cleared to compete.
However, the post-competition testing revealed the presence of darbepoetin, a new substance with the same effects as EPO, namely the boosting of red blood cells, which is a great benefit to endurance athletes.
Muehlegg was stripped of his medal in the 50km event and banned from the remainder of the Games, although he was permitted to keep the gold medals he won earlier in the 10km and 30km freestyle events -- the first Winter Olympic gold medals won by Spain since 1972.
Russian cross-country legend Larissa Lazutina was also forced to relinquish her gold in Sunday's 30km classical race after testing positive for darbepoetin.
The 31-year-old Muehlegg, nicknamed the Spanish Bull for his raw power, could be suspended for two years.
Muehlegg, who maintained earlier that the abnormally high red blood cell count could have been caused by changes in his diet and a bout of diarrhoea in the days leading up to the event, was not part of the national delegation that returned to Spain on Tuesday.
The German-born Muehlegg, who opted to immigrate to Spain after repeated dissatisfaction with the treatment he received from Germany's skiing federation, was scheduled to be given a hero's welcome, but a reception with King Juan Carlos was cancelled by the royal palace on Monday.
Islam is very clear about the place of God in human affairs: everywhere.
Humanity's appropriate relationship to God is in the meaning of the word itself &#150 Islam is an Arabic word that translates as "submission" or "surrender," while Muslim means one who submits to God's will. 
Muslims know God's will as it was revealed to the prophet Mohammed by the archangel Gabriel in the form of communications and visions.
The Koran (or Qur'an) is the holy book that records His words, and the centrepiece of the Islamic religion and way of life, socially, morally and culturally. 
Who was Mohammed and when did he live?
The prophet Mohammed was born about 570 in Mecca, in what is now Saudi Arabia.
As a trader, he travelled throughout the region and encountered both Christians and Jews, becoming familiar with their traditions.
Islam recognizes many Biblical figures as prophets, including Adam, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, and Jesus.
None of them, however, delivered the completed word of God.
That fell to Mohammed and the Koran.
At 40 Mohammed received his first vision of the archangel Gabriel, who brought the word of God.
He told Mohammed to go and preach monotheism, the word of the one true God (in Arabic, Allah ).
This vision and future communications from the angel were recorded later to form the Koran.
Mohammed died in 632. 
Were Mohammed and his message well received?
Though he proclaimed himself as God's messenger, Mohammed convinced few people at first.
By 622, however, a dozen years after his first vision, he had enough followers that the Meccans were nervous about him and plotted his death.
In the memorable event known as the Hejira ("departure" or "flight"), Mohammed and some of his followers fled to the city he renamed Medina (City of the Prophet).
The Muslim calendar begins the year of the Hejira.
In Medina he established a community based on the commonality of Islam rather than on the old affiliations of tribe or family.
The common bonds were monotheism, shared practice and elevated regard for the poor.
By the time of Mohammed's death in 632, Islam's influence had spread through conversion as well as through conquest.
Mecca had been captured from Arab pagans and was the centre of Islam.
The recorded sayings and deeds of Mohammed during his life, called Hadith, is a continuing source of moral and religious guidance to Muslims. 
What are The Five Pillars of Islam?
The core practices of Islam are known as The Five Pillars.
They are: Profession of Faith.
A Muslim must believe "There is no god but Allah and Mohammed is His messenger" and must say so aloud.
Daily prayer.
A Muslim prays five times daily facing Mecca, with others if possible.
The prayers are said at dawn, noon, mid-afternoon, sunset and nightfall.
On Friday there is a special noon prayer service.
Zakat .
Zakat was originally a tax on possessions with the proceeds going mostly to aid the poor (though the money might be spent for a few other purposes including ransoming captives of war).
The word now refers more to almsgiving.
Fasting.
The month of Ramadan is the ninth month of the Muslim lunar calendar.
It was during Ramadan that the Koran was revealed.
It is one of the Pillars of Islam that Muslims fast from daybreak to sunset for the entire month of Ramadan.
The prohibition includes drinking and smoking as well as eating.
In 2001, the first day of fasting is in mid-November.
Hajj (pilgrimage).
At least once in a lifetime every Muslim is to make a pilgrimage to Mecca, as long as the expense is not prohibitive. 
How many Muslims are there in the world?
At about 1.3 billion followers, Islam is the second most populous religion in the world.
There are 50 per cent more Christians, but only about one per cent as many Jews.
The Organization of the Islamic Conference has 57 members including both nations we associate with Islam &#150 Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Iraq &#150 and many we don't think much about at all &#150 Kazakhstan, Kirgyzstan, Turkmenistan &#150 or at least didn't until recently.
There are 15 countries in which Muslims make up almost 100 per cent of the population.
Besides the few million living in the U.S. and the hundreds of thousands in Canada, Muslims populate most of a wide swathe of land across North Africa through the Middle East and into Asia.
Indonesia, with over 170 million Muslims, is the nation with the highest population of Muslims.
Though difficult to establish with certainty, even the population of China may be about 10 per cent. 
What are jihad and fatwa ?
Jihad is "holy war" or "holy struggle.
" It is a Muslim's duty to resort to war when necessary in the defence of the faith.
In modern Islam, the fighting is largely personal, including the obligations to fight temptation by purifying one's own spirit, and to support what is morally correct.
War with other nations is only permissible when the faith is in danger, and only in self-defence.
A fatwa is an opinion delivered by a scholar versed in Koran and Hadith on a difficult problem of law.
The word came into western consciousness when Ayatollah Khomeini of Iran called for the "execution" of author Salman Rushdie for writing a novel some Muslims took as blasphemous.
Health Canada has issued a warning about the margarine "Becel Pro-Activ" which claims to lower cholesterol.
The department says it's being sold without approval and it may even be dangerous for certain people. 
The Health Canada advisory says the product is made with a plant compound, phytosterols, which the manufacturer, Unilever, claims lowers blood cholesterol levels.
According to Statistics Canada, 45 per cent of men and 43 per cent of women have elevated cholesterol levels. 
The product is said to be a "healthy heart margarine that helps manage cholesterol." 
Health Canada says the company is making a therapeutic claim and that means it's considered a drug.
To be a drug, the company has to provide evidence the product does what it claims to do. 
According to a release, the department says "phytosterols may pose health risks for certain groups, such as: pregnant women, children, people predisposed to hemorrhagic strokes and people on cholesterol-lowering medication." 
In the European Union and Australia, Becel Pro-Activ is required to carry a label advising that certain consumers may be placed at risk by consuming the product. 
Pro-Activ hit the Canadian market in July.
Health Canada advises anyone who has been using this product and is concerned to consult their doctor.
The federal NDP is calling for a public inquiry into the effects of depleted uranium on Canadian troops and their families.
The demand came during an emotional news conference Friday by two veterans who served in the Gulf War but came home sick. 
Perry Holloway and Eldon Berghamer say they fear they're going to die a slow and painful death like former Gulf War veteran Terry Riordon.
Traces of depleted uranium were found in Riordon's body nine years after he returned from the Gulf. 
They're also concerned about passing on whatever is making them sick to their partners.
Both veterans say one of their symptoms is burning semen. 
At the news conference, NDP MP Wendy Lil read a letter from the former wife of Berghamer, who served in the Gulf War when he was 19 years old. 
In the letter, she said she had eight miscarriages that doctors couldn't explain and when their daughter was born she weighed only two pounds and has suffered many illnesses. 
"I have no way of knowing if all or any of these things are related to Eldon's participation in the Gulf War," she wrote. 
"However, I do think that the military should be helping Eldon to find out if they are responsible and if they are, they should help him." 
The military has said depleted uranium poses no health risk, but has offered to test veterans who think they were exposed. 
Berghamer believes he could have been exposed to the radioactive metal used in weapons during a scud missile attack. 
Some scientists believe soldiers may have ingested depleted uranium dust from exploded weapons and they say that could be harmful. 
The NDP wants a public inquiry and extensive independent testing of sick veterans. 
Defence Minister Art Eggleton said Friday his department has requested more information on depleted uranium from other countries and he's open to the findings. 
Written by CBC News Online staff
Japan may soon have a missile defence system developed in cooperation with the United States. 
The Japanese cabinet endorsed a plan for an intensive research program on Friday, just as Japan put its four Aegis missile warships on stand-by, anticipating possible missile tests by North Korea. 
Officials say North Korea's missile testing spurred Japan's endorsement of the new project. 
The research project being undertaken by Japanese and American scientists will explore an early warning system and batteries of missiles than can knock out incoming missiles. 
So far no country has been able to perfect such a system.
The closest, the Patriot missile used in the Gulf War, didn't have a very good record, according to experts. 
The U.S. is now looking to improve that technology and is happy with the help of Japan, a world leader in missile-guidance systems. 
Written by CBC News Online staff
The United States released an updated most-wanted terrorist list on Wednesday. 
Some of the international suspects have been at large for years.
The list includes Osama bin Laden, his top two deputies and several members of his al-Qaeda network who were implicated in earlier bombings overseas. 
President George W. Bush said the 22 most hunted men in the world "have put themselves on the list because of great acts of evil." 
"Terrorists live in shadows," said Attorney General John Ashcroft.
"We will shine the light of justice on them." 
The FBI has deemed all the elusive suspects to be terrorists.
The bureau is offering a reward in the millions of dollars for information on bin Laden's whereabouts. 
FBI director Robert Mueller said authorities are using the power and reach of the world's media to help fight terrorism. 
Also on Wednesday, NATO's secretary general said it will help the U.S. meet its intelligence and other needs in the fight against terrorism. 
"These terrorists are not 10 feet tall," said Lord Robertson after meeting with Bush.
"They are not insuperable.
They are not unvanquishable.
But we are." 
NATO is offering military support to its members and for the first time, NATO surveillance aircraft are on their way to help patrol and defend the U.S. 
Written by CBC News Online staff
Bombardier, the third-largest maker of civilian jets in the world, said it will lay off 3,800 workers worldwide 2,700 of them in Canada as it faces lower demand for its jets as a result of the Sept. 11 attacks and the general slowdown in air travel. 
Most of the Canadian layoffs will take place in Montreal, which will lose 2,005 jobs.
Another 650 jobs will disappear at its former de Havilland facility north of Toronto. 
The company also warned that if the markets don't recover "significantly" within the next few months, another 2,700 employees could be laid off. 
Bombardier employs 79,000 people around the world. 
"We are striving, through both our decisions and our actions, to protect the corporation from the shockwaves that are now rocking the markets and to reinforce all our business sectors and, in particular, the financial services sector," Bombardier CEO Robert Brown said. 
Brown said Bombardier hasn't lost any orders and only four or five deliveries are delayed.
But he said it was only prudent to act now. 
"If we don't adjust the rate now and we come towards the end of the year and we have a large number of aircraft that are undelivered, this is something that would make the situation very difficult for Bombardier and we would probably have to take more severe action." 
The company said it will take a $45 million pre-tax charge to account for the layoffs. 
It will take a further special pre-tax charge of $663 million as it pulls out of the manufactured housing and the consumer products financing markets entirely . 
Brown said the company plans to deliver 370 business and regional aircraft this year, down from the 410 it had been planning for. 
The slowdown will lead to a 50 per cent reduction in the company's targeted earnings per share growth for the year.
Previously, the company had been guiding analysts and investors to a 30 to 40 per cent growth in earnings per share.
Now, it sees that growth being limited to 15 per cent. 
"The current situation does not impair either the strength nor the leadership of Bombardier," Brown said.
"We're making sure we are ready to take full advantage of the economic recovery when it comes." 
Bombardier said its rail transportation division continues to show strength. 
Brown said it was possible that the events of Sept. 11 will lead to more sales of its smaller corporate jets.
Bombardier bought Lear Jet in June 1990. 
Bombardier shares slid sharply on news of the lower earnings projections.
By the close of trading, they had lost 20 per cent of their value, down $2.85 at $11.60. 
In his last visit to SkyDome, the Toronto Blue Jays honoured Baltimore Orioles third baseman Cal Ripken Jr. in a pre-game ceremony on Thursday night. 
Ripken, who announced earlier this year that he is retiring at the end of the season, is playing his last game in Toronto. 
With his wife Kelly and their two kids in attendance the Blue Jays presented Ripken with an original painting honouring his consecutive games-played record which he broke in 1995. 
One of Ripken's most memorable all-star games was in Toronto, where he hit a game winning three-run home run off Montreal Expos' ace Dennis Martinez, to take home the MVP honours. 
He also won the home-run derby the day before , belting out eight straight homers. 
"The all-star game here in '91, and I've had a few opportunities to play in them, was the most special," said Ripken, who appeared in 19 all-star games. 
Jays team president Paul Godfrey and general manager Gord Ash also presented Ripken with a $5,000 US cheque to the Cal Ripken Sr. foundation. 
Toronto manager Buck Martinez then gave a quick speech recounting his personal memories of Ripken's streak before presenting him with an honorary Jays jersey with the number eight on it. 
With the class that baseball fans have to come to expect from Ripken, he ended the ceremony thanking the fans of Toronto. 
"It's been an honour and a pleasure to play before you," said Ripken.
"Let's enjoy the game." 
Justice Department officials in the United States say they are facing the threat of more terrorist attacks at home and abroad in the next several days. 
U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft issued the "heightened security alert" Monday for the U.S. or its interests abroad. 
"The administration views this information as credible, but unfortunately does not contain specifics," said Ashcroft.
"It should be taken seriously." 
FBI Director Robert Mueller said the information is "not specific as to intended target or as to intended method." 
Ashcroft noted law enforcement agencies across the country are on high alert, and that Americans should be patient if they run into increased security procedures. 
He said people should go about their business, but remain alert, and report any unusual activity to local authorities. 
Ashcroft explained that he is making the threat public not to scare people, but to help prevent an attack. 
The FBI issued a similar warning on October 11, and Ashcroft said a heightened sense of awareness on the part of Americans may have already prevented an attack. 
Written by CBC News Online staff
Ottawa Senators defenceman Karel Rachunek sure has a flare for the dramatic. 
The second-year rearguard picked a perfect time to score his first goal of the season, putting the puck past Toronto goaltender Curtis Joseph with five seconds remaining in overtime to pull out a 2-1 win at the Corel Centre on Saturday. 
It appeared that the Leafs, who are a pitiful 1-10-1 in 12 regular-season games against the Sens, would escape from the nation's capital with a tie, but a miscue by Toronto defenceman
Dmitry Yushkevich gave the Senators their 11th win of the season. 
Yushkevich failed to get a pass across the offensive zone, and the puck was intercepted by Wade Redden, who fired it up to Rachunek for a 2-on-1 break. 
Toronto defenceman Aki Berg played the situation perfectly, and it actually looked like Rachunek had run out space to get a scoring chance, but he found a hole past Joseph. 
"I think Curtis Joseph thought I was going to pass it," said Rachunek.
"He was cheating a bit so there was space . . .
it was a lucky goal
but I'm real excited about it." 
Up until Rachunek's goal this contest was truly a goaltender's duel, with Joseph and Patrick Lalime frustrating the opposition at every opportunity. 
Joseph was particularly outstanding in the third period and made 25 saves to capture first star honours.
Not to be outdone, Lalime made 29 saves for the game's second star. 
"We got out of it pretty well.
We came back from a tough first period and at the start of the second, we took the game from there," said Lalime. 
With the win, the Sens extend their undefeated streak to nine games.
Despite the overtime loss, the Leafs maintain their hold on top spot in the Northeast Division. 
"As the game went on, we weren't as sharp
and then we made the mistake at the end," said Toronto coach and general manager Pat Quinn.
"Our power play wasn't as effective as we think it should have been." 
The Sens looked slow and sluggish in the first period, struggling to get the puck in the Toronto zone. 
Their troubles were compounded when enforcer Andre Roy received a five-minute penalty and a game misconduct for hitting Berg and drawing blood over his right eye. 
It was a questionable call, since television replays clearly showed Berg's cut didn't occur from an elbow or stick, as thought by officials, but from his head hitting the glass. 
If killing off a five-minute penalty wasn't enough for the Sens to handle, Bill Muckalt made his team's job a little more difficult when he hit Darcy Tucker from behind into the goalpost, giving Toronto a two-man advantage. 
The Leafs, who are a pitiful 24th overall on the power play with an 11.3 per cent conversion rate, didn't waste a perfect opportunity to strike first against the Sens. Yushkevich fired a beautiful snap snot from the point that beat Lalime on the stick side at 14:15 of the first. 
It was Yushkevich's fourth goal of the season, and 200th point of his career. 
The Sens, who managed just one shot on net in the opening period, picked up the pace in the second period, and created a number of scoring chances but were consistently denied by Joseph. 
After near misses from Chris Herberger, Marian Hossa and Zdeno Chara, the Sens finally put one past Joseph with 36 seconds remaining in the period. 
With time winding down Toronto forward Mikael Renberg coughed up the puck at the Ottawa blueline, resulting in a 2-on-1 attempt for the Sens. Off a pass from Daniel Alfredsson, Shawn McEachern and Todd White sprinted into the Toronto zone with only Bryan McCabe back. 
It looked like the scoring chance wouldn't result in a shot, but McEachern managed to get the puck past McCabe and out in front to White, who put it through Joseph's pads for his ninth goal of the season. 
"We've been finding ways to win and tonight was no different," said White."It's good to see that we didn't panic.
We stayed with the game plan and came back.
We had a lot of chances in the second period and weren't able to get any by Joseph, so the tying goal was important for us." 
Both Joseph and Lalime played prominent roles in the third period, making a number of outstanding saves to keep the game tied in regulation. 
Joseph came up big in the dying seconds of regulation, making a nice leg save on Martin Havlat to send the game into overtime. 
Notes:
Toronto centre Robert Reichel left the ice with an undisclosed injury six minutes into the game.
He ran into an Ottawa post and the end boards following a hit by Magnus Arvedson.
Jerry Colangelo knew Diamondbacks fans had some growing up to do last year, when Todd Pratt batted at Bank One Ballpark for the first time since his home run eliminated Arizona in 1999. 
There were hardly any boos. 
"It's an indication that the fan had a ways to go in terms of being sophisticated or following their team and knowing who the villains are and who the villains aren't," the Arizona owner said Friday.
"I think there was more of a following this year." 
There was a line of fans waiting to get into the merchandise store Friday at the BOB, stretching out onto the sidewalk as people waited in the Sonoran Desert heat to buy anything in purple and gold in preparation for Saturday's World Series opener against the New York Yankees. 
"People are going absolutely bonkers in buying shirts and caps," said Colangelo, hearing a "ka-ching!"
each time the cash register clicked. 
Still, the laid-back fans in the desert sunshine are at a polar opposite of their Bronx counterparts. 
"The fans in New York are, without a doubt, the most passionate, obsessive, obnoxious, loyal, demeaning, vulgar fans on the face of the earth," said Curt Schilling, Arizona's Game 1 starter. 
Colangelo -- who said he pitched ahead of former-Yankee Jim Bouton in the rotation at Bloom Township High School outside Chicago -- estimates the Diamondbacks will take in an extra $10 million US to $16 million US from the World Series, depending on how long the Series goes. 
Arizona, in its fourth major-league season, has wiped out an operating deficit by winning its first NL pennant.
Its season-ticket base declined from 36,000 in 1998 to 27,000 in 1999 to 24,000 last year and 22,000 this season. 
Earlier this week, the Diamondbacks sold an additional 1,000 season tickets for next year in a promotion this week tying them to World Series seats, and with the added attention gained by the World Series, Colangelo hopes to get back to about 27,000 by the opening day. 
"The World Series is the biggest event ever to hit this state," said the 61-year-old Colangelo, also the controlling owner of the NBA's Phoenix Suns. 
His group paid a $130 million US in expansion fees for the Diamondbacks, gave up $25 million US in national television money to get the team, made $125 million US contribution to ball park construction and had $50 million US in startup costs. 
After going 65-97 in their initial season, the Diamondbacks embarked on a spending spree that included Randy Johnson and won the NL West with a 100-62 record in 1999 only to lose to the Mets in the first round of the playoffs. 
Arizona slipped to 85-77 and third place last year, then bounced back to go 92-70 and win a second division title. 
That's quite a contrast to 1998's other expansion team, the Tampa Bay Devil Rays, whose 62-100 record this year matched Pittsburgh's for baseball's worst. 
"I had infrastructure in place.
I had 30 years of experience in professional sports.
Those are tremendous advantages," Colangelo said.
"Philosophically, we had a different approach.
We lost 25 per cent of our ticket base, and that's when I said we're going to have to compete now." 
H e a d l
i n e s :
The U.S. cracked down on terrorist financing Wednesday, freezing the assets of 62 people and organizations in at least 10 countries including Canada. 
The new list of individuals and businesses suspected of having links to Osama bin Laden is in addition to the others targeted by U.S. President George W. Bush last month. 
One of the entities, Barakaat North America Inc, has an address in Ottawa, and one individual, Liban Hussein, had both an American and Canadian address. 
All are alleged to have ties to two suspected bin Laden financial networks Al Taqua and Al-Barakaat. 
Speaking at a Treasury Department conference, U.S. President George W. Bush said authorities had shut down the offices of suspected terrorist funding groups in four states. 
According to Wednesday's order, the Al-Barakaat organization also has affiliates in Minnesota, Massachusetts, Ohio and Washington. 
Bush said if people choose to do business with terrorists, they won't be allowed to do business with America. 
Another resident whose assets were frozen was Gerad Jama of Minneapolis. 
Other countries with frozen assets include Somalia, Liechtenstein, the Bahamas, Sweden, Austria, Italy and the United Arab Emirates. 
Italian police searched the homes of Youssef M. Nada and Ali Himat, two men identified by the Italian press as the founders of one organization on the list, Al Taqua. 
They were described as president and vice-president of Nada Management Organization in Lugano, Switzerland.
The order also names Mansour-Fattouh of Zurich, Switzerland, and Hussein Abdullahi Kahie of Somalia. 
A White House spokesman said the "war on the financial front" is just as important as military action in defeating the terrorists.
Ari Fleischer said, "The less money they have, the fewer missions they'll be able to carry out." 
Bush is expected to reveal more details later Wednesday. 
Written by CBC News Online staff
Canada 3000, which learned late Thursday that it would get as much as $75 million in federal loan guarantees, said Friday it will soon ask federal competition authorities to declare Air Canada's new discount airline illegal. 
Air Canada announced its Tango service earlier this month.
That service would see some of its aircraft and personnel re-deployed to a no-frills discount service beginning Nov. 1. 
Canada 3000's Kinnear was busy bashing Air Canada in his speech to the travel agents, accusing it of trying to drive its competitors out of business. 
Canada 3000's shares soared Friday after the federal government provided it with up to $75 million in loan guarantees. 
Canada 3000 shares closed up 95 cents at $4.10. 
Canada 3000 has slashed its flight schedules, cut staff and implemented pay cuts in response to its reduced business. 
"Canada 3000 offers the only alternative domestic jet service to many cities and regions in Canada," said transport minister David Collenette. 
Collenette said it's important to maintain Canada 3000 as a viable competitor to Air Canada. 
At the same time, he warned Air Canada that it would have to undergo some significant restructuring before it would be eligible for loan guarantees. 
Air Canada issued a statement saying it expected to be included in the government's loan guarantee program.
"We look forward to working with the Government of Canada on establishing a stabilization package with comparable conditions so that Air Canada would not find itself competing with a selectively subsidized Canadian industry, as well as a massively subsidized U.S. industry," the airline said. 
The Globe and Mail reported Friday that Air Canada had hired BMO Nesbitt Burns to advise it on options to help it deal with its current debt and revenue crisis. 
Cabinet approved Canada 3000's loan guarantee on Thursday.
Collenette said he expected the money would come from the government's general revenues for this fiscal year. 
John Lecky, chair of Canada 3000 Inc., said on Oct.15 the company could run out of cash by Christmas without the loan help. 
Early in October, Ottawa gave $160 million to Canadian carriers including Air Canada and Canada 3000 to compensate for temporary closure of airspace after the suicide hijacking attacks on Washington, New York and Pennsylvania. 
Collenette said he hoped and expected the federal loan guarantees wouldn't cost taxpayers because Canada 3000 will be able to repay its creditors. 
Written by CBC News Online staff
he United States' plan for a national missile defence (NMD) system seems like nothing more than a dream.
Technologically it would be an amazing feat, essentially eliminating the threat of nuclear attack.
But politically it could be a disaster.
The object of the NMD system is to give the U.S. the power to protect itself from incoming ballistic missiles, whether launched by accident or as an attack from so-called "rogue states."
The system would also protect other countries, such as Japan which lies within striking distance of North Korea.
However, countries like Russia and China warn that creating a missile defence system would destabilize the current balance of nuclear power by giving the Americans the upper hand, and that could start a new arms race.
Others say the end of the Cold War marked the end of the need for defence systems the likes of President Ronald Reagan's Star Wars project.
Russia also said it wasn't going to cut back on its strategic nuclear missiles if the United States violates the Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) treaty.
The 1972 treaty, in which the two countries agreed not to develop missile defence systems, is credited for what has been almost 30 years of nuclear stability around the world.
In January 1999, the Russian Nezavisimaya Gazeta newspaper said the NMD system was an attack on Russia that aimed at "overcoming the last remaining barrier to American world domination.
" 
ashington assured Russia it had nothing to worry about.
The system is intended to protect against possible threats from countries such as Iraq, Iran and North Korea.
North Korea already has weapons that can reach Japan and is believed to be ready to test a Taepodong-2 missile that could travel as far as Alaska or Hawaii.
In fact, at one point President Bill Clinton threatened to veto the NMD bill unless certain changes were made, including affirming a U.S. commitment to working with Russia to reduce weapons.
The bill was amended and in March 1999 was passed in the Senate by a vote of 97 to 3.
In February 2001, Russia presented NATO with a counterproposal to the U.S. plan, one that would be tactical in nature and that would put the emphasis on evaluating individual threats rather than on military hardware.
Russia says its proposal would leave the ABM treaty intact.
However, Washington has proposed the treaty be amended so the NMD project can go ahead.
Russia and China aren't alone in their objections.
Nearly every non-nuclear state at the United Nations is opposed to the American plan.
anada has yet to officially say where it stands on the issue, neither denouncing the technology nor declaring its undying support.
However, Foreign Affairs Minister Lloyd Axworthy spoke out against it at a United Nations conference in April 2000.
He said a missile defence system could threaten international security and damage the nuclear non-proliferation treaty.
"Why make a decision on a highly expensive, unproven arms system that could have major repercussions on the broad arms control regime when there are other options?"
Axworthy said later when speaking to reporters.
"There are ways of dealing with these matters multilaterally."
Canada's opinion may not seem to matter all that much.
The Americans don't need Canada geographically (the U.S. would already have North America covered and Canada certainly poses no nuclear threat) and they hardly need our permission.
But analysts say the U.S. would likely find it more difficult to persuade countries like South Korea or China to support the project if it doesn't even have the support of one of its friendliest neighbours.
The U.S. has been lobbying Canada &#150 along with all NATO countries &#150 for support.
In March 2000, Canadian reporters were invited to the Pentagon by U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense John Hamre.
They were told if Canada won't actively support America's National Missile Defense system, it would find its role as a partner in NORAD significantly diminished.
Still, Canada has limited its participation to research and consultation with the U.S. and other countries to understand how the technology would work and how it would be used.
If a missile defence system does become a reality, Canada doesn't want to be left in the dark.
espite the political problems, its seems that the biggest obstacle preventing the NMD system from becoming a reality is the fact that the technology just doesn't work, well not yet anyway.
When the U.S. announced its intention to develop a Ronald Reagan Star-Wars-like defence system in February 1996, the plan was to have the technology working by 1999 and the system deployed by 2002.
Of course that didn't happen.
The U.S. national missile defence system would be composed of two main elements.
Ground systems and satellites would provide an early warning system, allowing the U.S. to detect missiles soon after they're launched.
And a battery of "kill missiles" would give them the ability to intercept and destroy the incoming missiles.
But the NMD system is turning out to be one of the most complex weapons ever designed, so complex some say it will never work.
Every test of the technology so far has failed.
In January 2000, the U.S. military conducted a mock nuclear attack.
A Minuteman intercontinental ballistic missile, designed to carry a nuclear warhead, was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California.
Twenty minutes later, another smaller missile was launched from the Marshall Islands about 7,000 kilometres away.
The second missile was supposed to hit the first, but it missed.
They tried again in July, but again the target was missed.
One military official described it as trying to hit a bullet with another bullet. 
The repeated failures are certainly bad news for U.S. military officials who hope to gain support from the international community.
And it doesn't leave them with much of a defence against critics who say the $700 million US project is a waste of taxpayers' money and the funds should go towards social programs instead. 
The Pentagon had extended its deadline for deployment of the NMD system to 2005, but in September 2000, President Clinton said he wasn't confident it would be ready in time.
It's now in the hands of his successor, President George W. Bush, who has said he would deploy a system like NMD "at the earliest possible date."
Look out Luke Skywalker, go home E.T., and Leo, you may not be the king of the world after Friday when Britain's boy wizard, Harry Potter ( news - web sites ), debuts in movie theaters in one of the most-anticipated films of the year.
It's easy to see why the children's story " Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone " ("Philosopher's Stone" overseas) will likely be a blockbuster.
Author J.K. Rowling ( news - web sites )'s books about the 11-year-old's exploits at the Hogwarts School of Wizardry and Witchcraft have sold some 125 million copies around the world and drafted legions of fans into a ready-made audience for the movie.
The film will open in over 3,500 locations in the United States -- a near record -- and about 70 countries over the next three to four weeks.
Early reviews have been positive and advance ticket sales are taking off like a witch's broom.
Beyond the film lies a marketing and merchandising campaign built on the idea of "less is more," and that, experts said, could mean billions of dollars in year to come for the film's producers at Warner Bros. and parent AOL Time Warner Inc. .
Before the money can come rolling in, however, the movie had to remain true to Rowling's books in which kids are plucked from a world of non-magical "muggles" and taught wizardry by the likes of Professors McGonagall, Snapel and Dumbledore.
"I'd heard these horrendous, and actually quite amusing, stories about how some directors wanted to adapt the book, like changing the locale to a Hollywood High School," said director Chris Columbus .
"
(But) to destroy the foundation of this world and the characters would alienate our audience."
In London's Kings Cross Stations off platform 9-3/4, special kids can catch the Hogwarts Express to a medieval castle where they will learn to cast spells and battle evil.
Harry (played by Daniel Radcliffe) is one of those kids, dropped off at the home of his cruel aunt and uncle Dursley, after his own parents -- wizards -- were killed by a demon.
Potter doesn't know why his forehead is scarred with a lightning bolt or why he communicates with animals.
But he does know there is a special place for him somewhere in the world.
Harry's real home is at Hogwarts, and after admission letters begin arriving at his home on his 11th birthday, he is finally taken to the school where his mother and father met.
Hogwarts' grizzled old Rubeus Hagrid (Robbie Coltrane) becomes Harry's guardian, and it is Hagrid who shows Harry the mound of gold coins his parents left him, outfits the young wizard with his first wand, and buys him his white owl.
But Harry's real Hogwarts friends are fellow first-year students Ron Weasley (Rupert Grant), a happy-go-lucky kid with only B-grade magic skills, and Hermione Granger (Emma Watson), a smart-as-a-whip girl and a master in the ways of the wand.
Their lives at Hogwarts are filled with fun and adventure, mystery and intrigue, three-headed dogs, dragons and unicorns.
Over the year, they unravel a mystery surrounding a "sorcerer's stone" that could give infinite life to Harry's evil nemesis.
"The script is faithful, the actors are just right, the sets, costumes, makeup and effects match and sometimes exceed anything one could imagine," writes movie critic Todd McCarthy of showbiz newspaper Daily Variety.
Now, if only the business of "Harry Potter" can measure up.
As with the film, Warner Bros., working with Rowling, has tried to avoid overhyping Potter products.
The film studio only has one global marketing partner, soft drink maker Coca Cola.
"Our mantra was read the books and you'll understand.
When you have a brand like this that originates from a literary property, by it's very nature, you handle it differently," said Diane Nelson, senior vice president of family entertainment.
There are other reasons for the "less is more" campaign.
In recent years, licensees of many film products have felt burned by paying a high price for the licenses only to see products vanish quickly from retail shelves as the movie hype wore off.
Two of the first major movies to suffer that fate, experts said, were 1999's "Stars Wars:
Episode 1 -- The Phantom Menace", a box office hit ($922 million globally) and merchandise flop, and 1998's "Godzilla" with ticket sales of $375 million.
"Many movies stopped clicking emotionally with consumers ... and a child or teenager has to feel like this is something they want to be part of their lives," said Seth Seigal, co-chairman of licensing company, The Beanstalk Group. "
Also, there were just too many products in stores."
The "less-is-more" campaign, too, helps protect what Warner Bros. hopes will be a moneymaker for years to come.
If all goes well, financial analyst Jill Krutick of Salomon Smith Barney figures, the Harry Potter movie, consumer products, video, DVD, TV and other sales could reap $450 million to $700 million in operating income for AOL Time Warner.
That is only from the first movie.
A second Harry Potter movie begins shooting next week and a third is in the works.
It's enough money to make any muggle think there's a lot of magic to this young British orphan's world.
And it's no fantasy, it's reality, and it all begins on Friday.
Business-to-business software maker Agile Software Corp. (
Nasdaq: AGIL - news ) on Wednesday posted a narrower fiscal second-quarter net loss and said that business had stabilized, but warned it was way off previous high levels.
"We're seeing demand flatten," chief executive Bryan Stolle told Reuters in a telephone interview. "
But that doesn't mean it's going back up, it just means we're not scared witless anymore."
Like every other business-to-business software company, Agile has seen share price tumble as the slowing U.S economy has led corporations to curtail their technology spending.
But by contrast with the previous quarter, Agile saw some large deals come back in the second quarter, such as two seven-figure contracts signed with existing customers Lucent Technologies Inc.
(NYSE: LU - news ) and Ciena Corp.
(Nasdaq: CIEN - news ), Stolle said.
"We think people feel like they have a grip on where their demand is now and they've budgeted their business around that," Stolle said.
"They're still spending less, but at least they're willing to spend something."
But Agile -- which signed 26 new customers in the second quarter -- still saw its revenues slow considerably to $21.2 million, an increase of just 5 percent, from the $20.2 million booked in the prior period.
In the first quarter, revenue growth was up 48 percent from the year before and stood at $23.3 million.
Agile, based in San Jose, California, posted a net loss, including numerous charges, of $4.5 million, or 9 cents a share, compared to a net loss of $14.1 million, or 31 cents a share, the year before.
Excluding charges, Agile's proforma loss was 9 cents a share, beating analyst's lowered consensus of 12 cents a share, according to Thomson Financial/First Call.
In after hours trading, Agile's shares jumped to $16.40, immediately following the release of its second quarter earnings, after a Nasdaq close of $15.99.
The shares later lost those gains and were trading as low as $15.02, according to Instinet.
Since the beginning of the year, the company's shares have lost 70 percent of their value, significantly underperforming their peers in the Standard & Poor's Computer Software ( SPCMSF - news ).
The index is up 43 percent over the time period.
Although Stolle said he was optimistic for the long term, he stressed that in the short term, the company's visibility was still poor.
"In the short term, we don't think much has changed," he said.
"We think it's still a very cloudy picture."
To that end, Agile forecast that it would lose 10 cents to 15 cents a share in both the third quarter and the fourth quarter of fiscal 2002.
That's wider than it's previous estimate of a loss in the range of 5 cents to 15 cents a share.
The outlook is more bearish than analysts' current consensus estimate for a 10-cent per-share loss in the third quarter and a loss of 7 cents a share in the fourth quarter, according to First Call.
Agile also said it sees full year fiscal 2002 revenue of $80 million to $85 million, below analysts' current estimate for annual revenue of $92.42 million.
Prior to its first warning of lower-than-expected earnings for the third and fourth quarter, Wall Street had expected Agile to record a loss of 6 cents in the third quarter and 2 cents in the fourth quarter, according to First Call.
Agile's software enables manufacturers to collaborate with their suppliers over the Internet on new or changing product designs and then find and purchase the necessary components.
Its customers include such high-tech names as Compaq Computer Corp.
(NYSE: CPQ - news ), Dell Computer Corp.
(Nasdaq: DELL - news ), Juniper Networks Inc.
(Nasdaq: JNPR - news ), and Lucent Technologies Inc. (LU.N).
"That (software) solves a real pain point that a lot of companies have right now," Ian Morton, an analyst with J.P Morgan
said, adding that Agile's product is also easier to install than competitive products.
"You can put it in, install it and get a very quick pay back," Morton said.
"Those are the kind of projects that are getting the green lights right now."
Shares, bonds and the U.S. dollar regained some composure on Tuesday as it appeared likely the fiery crash of an American Airlines passenger jet in a residential area of New York City was an accident and not a fresh attack upon the United States.
But airline stocks reeled as investors feared the disaster would deal a further devastating blow to public confidence in air travel, coming only two months after the hijacked-plane assaults on New York and Washington killed an estimated 4,600 people.
Insurance and travel industry shares were pummeled too.
"The recovery of U.S. stocks is helping the market here," said Ben Kwong, a director at brokers KGI Asia Ltd in Hong Kong.
"But the crash is creating some consolidation pressure as people are concerned it might affect consumer sentiment in the U.S. as it came close to the Thanksgiving and Christmas holidays."
Immediately after the crash of the plane, bound for Santo Domingo in the Dominican Republic, U.S. stocks and the dollar slumped as investors fled to safe haven investments such as gold.
But the Nasdaq composite moved into positive territory and the dollar ended mostly flat in New York as a U.S. National Transportation Safety Board ( news - web sites )
official said all information currently available suggested the tragedy that killed up to 269 people aboard the plane and on the ground was an accident.
The crash threatened to further unnerve consumers and put off a long-awaited recovery despite 10 Federal Reserve ( news - web sites )
interest rate cuts this year and higher government spending.
Gold eased off highs reached in New York in the wake of the crash and crude oil prices stayed weak despite expectations that OPEC ( news - web sites ) was about to reduce its output for the fourth time this year at its meeting on Wednesday.
Airline stocks across Asia were hit on Tuesday as the New York crash fueled fears that demand for air travel would slow further in an environment already severely affected by the September attacks on the United States.
Japan Airlines Co Ltd (JAL) dropped 2.69 percent to 289 yen in Tokyo and Cathay Pacific Airways lost as much as 3.7 percent to HK$7.80 at one point before rallying.
In Sydney, QBE Insurance Group Ltd shares lost ground as investors fretted over the fresh threat to the sector's solvency, despite the company's attempt to soothe the market on its exposure to the latest New York City tragedy.
The Japanese market, Asia's largest by capitalization, fell below the 10,000 mark as measured by the Nikkei average by midday, with the New York crash causing early jitters and bank stocks continuing their descent on concerns over bad loans.
The Nikkei average fell as much as 1.2 percent to 9,958.90, breaching 10,000 for the first time since October 10, before bouncing back just above 10,000.
Hong Kong's Hang Seng was down 0.55 percent, or 58.28 points, at 10,534.17 by 11:13 p.m. EST.
The U.S. dollar held firm in Tokyo and was bid up to 120.83 compared with 120.34 in late New York.
The greenback was also stronger too against European currencies.
In Tokyo, U.S. Treasuries were firmer, but traders said this was not so much to do with safe-haven flows.
It was more to do with the fact that the crash would still be a blow to consumer confidence and the economy, which would support expectations for yet another Fed rate cut.
Gold was fetching US$278.45/278.95 an ounce in Asia trading, compared with a London afternoon fix of $280.
Overnight in New York, technology stocks bounced with the Nasdaq composite ending 0.64 percent higher at 1,840.13 points.
But the Dow Jones industrial average closed off 0.6 percent at 9,554.37, dragged down by airline-related stocks like General Electric Co, manufacturer of the crashed plane's engines.
GE closed down 2.43 percent at $39.43.
In Europe, the FTSE Eurotop 300 index -- off more than 3 percent immediately after the crash -- closed down 2.2 percent.
Russian President Vladimir Putin ( news - web sites ) arrived in Washington on Monday night on his first official visit to the United States, according to a Reuters television cameraman at Andrews Air Force Base in Washington.
Putin and President Bush ( news - web sites ) were scheduled to meet at the White House on Tuesday, for the first of three days of talks expected to end with announcements about nuclear arms reductions by both sides.
The two leaders were also expected to issue a statement on the future of Afghanistan ( news - web sites ) and cooperation on counterterrorism.
Putin has been a key ally in the U.S.-led war on terrorism.
In the last two months, Putin has thrown his political weight behind U.S. military operations in Afghanistan.
He has also shared Russian intelligence with the United States on Afghanistan's ruling Taliban and the al Qaeda network of Saudi-born Islamic militant Osama bin Laden ( news - web sites ), whom Washington blames for the Sept. 11 attacks on America.
The Taliban held on to the southern bastion of Kandahar on Sunday, dismissing reports they would retreat to fight a guerrilla campaign in the mountains, as their opponents squabbled over Afghanistan ( news - web sites )'s future.
The Northern Alliance, which drove the fundamentalist militia out of Kabul last week, insisted it was committed to building an inclusive new government but gave no time frame, and said foreign peacekeepers may not be needed on Afghan soil.
Ethnic Pashtun tribes in the south, deeply suspicious of the mainly ethnic Tajik and Uzbek Northern Alliance, said they were pursuing their own efforts to agree a bloodless settlement with the Taliban and warned the Alliance not to march on Kandahar.
The Taliban have been pounded by 43 days of relentless U.S. air strikes to punish them for harboring Saudi-born militant Osama bin Laden ( news - web sites ), prime suspect in the September 11 hijack attacks in the United States that killed some 4,600 people.
Exiled former King Zahir Shah, seen as a key figure in a post-Taliban government, said a broad-based government was the only way to end decades of conflict in the war-weary country.
"The only hope for long-standing peace and stability in Afghanistan is to put in place a political structure which is representative of all Afghan people and all sectors including Pashtuns, Tajiks and Uzbeks," he told Britain's Sunday Telegraph.
"If this is not in place then peace will not come."
The military advance of the Northern Alliance, which swept into Kabul on Tuesday just days after starting a major land offensive, has far outstripped political progress on agreeing a future government for Afghanistan.
The Alliance had told other factions and its foreign allies that it would not enter Kabul until the structure of a broad-based post-Taliban government had been agreed.
But the Alliance now holds the capital, while a political deal is days or weeks away at best.
The U.N. says the Northern Alliance is obstructing efforts to arrange a crucial meeting on the country's political future.
The Alliance wants talks on Afghanistan's future to take place in Kabul, while the U.N. wants a neutral location.
Seeking to end the impasse, U.N. envoy Francesc Vendrell arrived in Kabul on Saturday for meetings with Northern Alliance leaders.
His arrival signaled the return of the U.N. to the ravaged city after an absence of more than two months.
Analysts say building a coherent government from factions that have mistrusted, fought and double-crossed each other for centuries is far easier in theory than in practice.
Zahir Shah's son-in-law, General Abdul Wali, told the Sunday Telegraph newspaper the king was concerned by the Northern Alliance seizure of Kabul.
"The Northern Alliance promised us that it would stop at the northern gates of Kabul to give others in the south time to move.
But they did not stop," Wali said.
"We're not judging anyone, just saying a promise is normally something you keep.
Obviously, the king is very concerned because he fears fighting might break out between factions and cause more casualties to innocent civilians."
The issue of foreign troops on Afghan soil drove a wedge between some Northern Alliance commanders and the international U.S.-led coalition that played a crucial role in aiding the opposition's military successes.
Senior Northern Alliance figures said that as long as they maintained security in Kabul, there would be no need for an international peacekeeping force.
Some were unhappy about the arrival of 100 British special forces troops near Kabul.
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said on Thursday the United States was deploying military forces to help fight a new war on terrorism, but cautioned that the conflict would be "a marathon, not a sprint."
Rumsfeld told reporters he had signed an order to move U.S. forces in response to the devastating Sept. 11 attack on America.
Defense officials said privately the order included moving airplanes and troops toward the Gulf and Afghanistan ( news - web sites ).
Washington has accused Afghanistan's ruling Taliban of harboring fugitive guerrilla leader Osama bin Laden ( news - web sites ) and has warned Kabul that it could face attack if he is not turned over to the United States.
Rumsfeld refused to give details of the military deployment order signed on Wednesday, but stressed at a Pentagon ( news - web sites ) news conference that President Bush ( news - web sites )'s "war on terrorism" would be fought on diplomatic, financial and military fronts and would not be quick.
"It is a marathon.
It's not a sprint," he said.
"It will certainly require the patience of all of us.
It also will require a lot of international support, and fortunately that's coming."
"What we're engaged in is something that is very, very different from World War II, Korea, Vietnam, the Gulf War ( news - web sites ), Kosovo, Bosnia, the kinds of things that people think of when they use the word war, campaign or conflict," he added.
Army Secretary Thomas White told reporters earlier that U.S. Army units had been ordered to deploy for possible military operations as part of a major Pentagon build-up in and around the Middle East.
He declined to give details, including whether elite Special Operations troops might move toward the region around Afghanistan, but added that "Army elements were part of the deployment order."
The elite Army Special Operations Command at its headquarters in Fort Bragg, North Carolina, confirmed it had received an order to deploy, but would not give details.
Officials said Rumsfeld signed an order that included plans to move dozens of heavy bombers, refueling planes and other combat aircraft toward the Middle East and Central Asia region.
The officials, who asked not to be identified, said the Pentagon was also putting together a second order involving a major package of fighters and other strike jets.
In addition to the deployment order, the Pentagon said on Thursday that 5,131 Air Force Reserve and Air National Guard troops had been ordered to active duty as part of a "homeland defense" mobilization authorized by Bush.
The activation was the first made under an order signed by Bush last week authorizing the call-up of up to 50,000 part-time armed forces troops to increase protection of U.S. skies and seaports and to help restore order in the wake of last week's attacks.
Shares in graphics chip maker NVIDIA Corp.
(Nasdaq: NVDA - news ) closed sharply lower on Thursday, extending a two-week slide after game publishers and analysts said Microsoft Corp.'s (Nasdaq: MSFT - news ) XBox ( news - web sites ) could ship in smaller quantities than initially expected.
Shares in NVIDIA closed down 8.5 percent at $28.88 on Nasdaq.
NVIDIA, which is making the primary graphics chip for the XBox game console, split 2-for-1 on Monday but have fallen in eight of the last 10 traded sessions.
Robertson Stephens analyst Eric Rothdeutsch said the sell-off on Thursday was directly related to expectations related to the XBox launch, but that any impact was "purely psychological."
Microsoft said on Wednesday it cannot yet forecast how many XBox units it will have available at the time of its much-heralded launch on Nov. 8 in the United States.
Many game publishers and analysts now believe that the number of game units available at launch will be closer to 300,000 than the 600,000 to 800,000 units Microsoft had initially pledged.
"We haven't heard anything about what (Microsoft's) day-one quantities are going to be," an NVIDIA spokesman told Reuters.
Microsoft has said it would ship between 1 million and 1.5 million XBox units by year-end.
But the software giant will not know how many of the consoles it will have available at launch until production hits full capacity at a plant in Mexico, a spokesman said on Wednesday.
One analyst said that the prospect of lower game console shipments at launch did not surprise industry participants.
"I've been hearing that for about two months," said Michael Wallace, who covers the video game industry for UBS Warburg.
"Is it possible?
Yeah."
Wallace also said it would be "pure speculation" to project a firm launch quantity yet because production has not begun.
The XBox is still on track for its Nov. 8 launch, a Microsoft spokesman said, adding the company told retailers last week that it was about to begin production.
Microsoft's North American XBoxes are being manufactured by Singapore-based contract manufacturing company Flextronics International Ltd.
(Nasdaq: FLEX - news ) at a facility in Mexico.
Alexander Blanton, an analyst at Ingalls & Snyder, said the contract manufacturing company had been ready to produce as many XBox consoles as Microsoft wanted "since at least the beginning of August, if not before."
"If there is a reduction I don't think it's them," he said.
Flextronics declined to comment on XBox production issues.
Take-Two Interactive Software Inc. (
Nasdaq: TTWO - news )
President Paul Eibeler said on a conference call Wednesday he had heard Microsoft was going to ship fewer units than had been planned, and said when asked by an analyst about a figure of 300,000 units, indicated that was plausible.
Shares in Take-Two closed down 22.2 percent at $7.99 on Nasdaq on Thursday, giving back much of the 31.8-percent gain posted on Wednesday.
Sony Corp ( news - web sites ).
(6758.T) ran into problems last year when it delivered far fewer PlayStation 2 ( news - web sites ) consoles than projected on launch day, leading to shortages and angry customers.
Retailers and analysts downplayed the risk of a similar backlash when Microsoft launches its competing platform.
"(Microsoft's) teams have been very proactive with us," said a major video game retailer, noting that the chain did not expect problems with shortages or the fulfillment of pre-orders. 
Stocks tumbled in late-morning trading on Friday as worries about the possibility of more attacks on the United States roiled Wall Street. 
A New York employee of broadcaster NBC has tested positive for anthrax, a bacteria whose spores are potentially deadly, MSNBC reported.
The news came after three reported anthrax cases in Florida, which are now being investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
"News about an NBC employee testing positive for anthrax rolled the market over, because if there's a broader terrorist threat, it makes the battle against terrorism a lot closer to home than Afghanistan ( news - web sites ) and it shakes consumer confidence a great deal," said Robert Cohen, head of trading at Credit Suisse First Boston. 
The blue-chip Dow Jones industrial average (.DJI) fell 165.1 points, or 1.75 percent, to 9,245.35 and the broader Standard & Poor's 500 Index
(.SPX) slid 18.21 points, or 1.66 percent, to 1,079.22.
The technology-laced Nasdaq Composite Index (.IXIC) shed 35.35 points, or 2.08 percent, to 1,666.12. 
U.S. law enforcement officials in the United States were put on the highest alert after the FBI ( news - web sites ) said Thursday afternoon it had received information there could be more attacks in the next few days both at home and against U.S. interests abroad. 
ADVERTISEMENT
The U.S.-led onslaught against Afghanistan ( news - web sites )'s ruling Taliban and the al Qaeda network of fugitive Osama bin Laden ( news - web sites ) moved into a new phase Saturday, with elite troops launching ground operations in the country's south as Washington said it would help Taliban foes.
Two weeks into devastating attacks that have seen waves of U.S. warplanes raining bombs across the country, heavy raids on the Taliban stronghold of Kandahar sparked panic and a "sudden rush" of dazed refugees to Pakistan, the United Nations ( news - web sites ) said.
Days after the United States unleashed fearsome AC-130 gunships, a U.S official in Washington told Reuters a new phase had been launched with combat troops.
"A group of special forces, including Army Rangers, went into Afghanistan today -- overnight Afghanistan time -- to conduct operations" in a mission lasting a few hours, the official said on condition of anonymity.
"
As of right now, they are clear of Afghan air space.
"
The official refused to define the nature of the mission or to say if there were any casualties, but he said the number of U.S. troops involved was "over 100."
The Pentagon ( news - web sites ) was expected to hold a briefing on the operation Saturday.
With pressure on the Taliban mounting, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, told reporters while on the way to Whiteman Air Force Base in Missouri, that Washington had "from time to time" provided anti-Taliban groups in Afghanistan with assistance, including ammunition.
As Taliban officials put the toll of dead and missing at up to 900, their ambassador to Pakistan said Friday the hardline movement stood firm and would not hand over bin Laden, blamed for the September 11 suicide attacks on the United States.
But the envoy, Abdul Salam Zaeef, warned that while U.S. planes may control the skies, their special forces on Afghan soil would meet their match, as would opposition Northern Alliance troops preparing to advance on the strategic Taliban-held city of Mazar-i-Sharif.
"The issue of Osama has not changed," he said.
"It is a matter of our faith -- we might as well change our faith.
"We have had some casualties, but remain strong.
If fighting starts on the ground, then let us see what will happen," Zaeef added.
Ignoring Friday's Muslim holy day, U.S. warplanes struck the Afghan capital Kabul and Kandahar, screaming over the cities at will and met by only scant anti-aircraft fire.
Fatoumata Kaba, a spokeswoman for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) said a "sudden rush" of around 3,500 Afghan refugees, mostly women and children, entered Pakistan Friday at the Chaman border point, the closest crossing from Kandahar.
After pounding Afghan cities with the biggest bombs residents of this war-ravaged country have known, the United States began radio broadcasts from EC-130E "Commando Solo" psychological operations aircraft, urging Afghans to keep away from Taliban military installations.
"We do not wish to harm you," one of the broadcasts said.
"Try to find ways to ignore the Taliban and Osama bin Laden's requests for help and do not give them food or shelter."
Eight U.S. personnel in north Afghanistan had been moving with opposition warlord General Abdul Rashid Dostum, a top Northern Alliance commander said.
"They are with General Dostum in Dara-i-Suf," Ustad Attah, a top opposition commander, told Reuters by satellite phone.
The town is some 90 km (55 miles) southeast of Mazar-i-Sharif.
With the vice tightening from the bombing, the Taliban faced an intensifying threat on the ground where the Northern Alliance said it was planning to encircle Mazar-i-Sharif and force the Taliban to surrender.
Northern Alliance officials also said a Taliban attempt to forge a truce across the country had been firmly rebuffed.
Mystery surrounded the Friday visit to Pakistan of Taliban tribal affairs minister Jalaluddin Haqqani, who controls a key portfolio in a country divided along ethnic lines.
It was not known who he met but a source who met him said he had not defected.
Haqqani, a powerful tribal leader from Afghanistan's dominant ethnic Pashtun majority and commander of five southeastern provinces, hails from the Paktia province bordering Pakistan.
Analysts say it is significant that in 13 days of U.S. bombing, the raids had not targeted some of the main provinces within Haqqani's power base. 
ADVERTISEMENT
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld dismissed speculation on Monday that the U.S. campaign in Afghanistan ( news - web sites ) could drag on for years and said the effectiveness of U.S. bombing was improving every day.
"There is no question that the effectiveness of the bombing is vastly improved as you have people on the ground in communication with the aircraft overhead," he told reporters in New Delhi at the end of a tour of key U.S. allies in the region.
He said there were larger numbers of teams on the ground helping both with humanitarian assistance and targeting. "
The effectiveness of the bombing is improving every day," he added.
"Do I think that Afghanistan will take years?
No I don't," he said after meeting Indian Defense Minister George Fernandes.
Rumsfeld flew in to India late on Sunday from Islamabad, where he told reporters the Taliban were no longer functioning as a proper government but that the terror networks they harbored still posed a threat to global security.
Rumsfeld made no mention of U.S. concerns that escalating tensions between nuclear-armed foes India and Pakistan over disputed Kashmir ( news - web sites ) could undermine the campaign to oust Afghanistan's purist Islamic Taliban regime.
A parade of big-name visitors, including Secretary of State Colin Powell ( news - web sites ) last month, have urged both countries to put their differences on hold while the assault on Afghanistan is under way.
But so far, there has been no reduction in tension.
On Sunday, India said it exchanged heavy fire with Pakistan across the military Line of Control in the Himalayan region of Kashmir.
At least 35 people were also killed in clashes with separatist militants on the Indian side, one of the heaviest one-day death tolls in the insurgency-torn state.
But Rumsfeld played down fears that tension between New Delhi and Islamabad could escalate into nuclear war, amid worries that Islamic militants could seize Pakistan's nuclear warheads if President Pervez Musharraf lost control of the country.
As rescue crews sorted through the rubble at the World Trade Center site, employees from retail brokerage Tucker Anthony Inc. were in the midst of moving to a bucolic setting 40 miles away in the woods of New York state.
Tucker Anthony had about 300 employees in 1 World Financial Center, across the street from the two World Trade Center towers that were hit by hijacked airplanes on Sept. 11 and then collapsed, leaving a total of more than 6,500 people dead or missing.
In the weeks following the disaster, the brokerage firm's ability to access critical data and rebuild its systems underscored the disaster recovery business's evolution from a simple insurance policy for back-up equipment to one focusing on highly orchestrated emergency services.
Tucker Anthony turned to IBM Corp.(NYSE:
IBM - news ), which has 3,000 employees working on recovery efforts after the attacks in both Washington D.C. and the Pentagon ( news - web sites ), including a team helping federal and local agencies.
This kind of work, called business continuity and recovery, is part of IBM's $33 billion global services business, which has become an increasing percentage of the Armonk, N.Y.-based computer giant's $88 billion in total revenues in 2000.
In turn, it has made IBM the envy of some other computer makers, such as Hewlett-Packard Co. (NYSE: HWP - news ) and Compaq Computer Corp.
(NYSE: CPQ - news ).
Indeed, Hewlett and Compaq said on Sept. 4 that they would merge in part to beef up their services offering.
IBM's disaster recovery team provides a range of services and hardware, from restoring networks, to laptop and desktop computers, to providing temporary workspace to shipping out new replacement equipment, said Todd Gordon, IBM's business continuity and recovery services general manager.
With many financial customers both in the World Trade Center and in neighboring buildings, IBM began fielding calls before the World Trade Center buildings had even collapsed.
"We got our first call at 9:10," Gordon explained, just 22 minutes after the first plane hit the World Trade Center.
The first tower toppled within the hour.
As the day went on, customers with contracts and those who did not wanted help with everything from figuring out how to get in touch with their employees to how to patch their data back together.
In some cases, he said, the needs were more dramatic.
It was "Help, I'm out of business.
Do you have a place we can go?"
Gordon said.
For Tucker Anthony, and about two dozen other companies, that place ended up being IBM's 175,000-square-foot (16,260-square-meter) building in the hills just north of the New York-New Jersey border.
Ever since, that normally quiet recovery center has been buzzing with adrenaline.
Behind one of the doors in the four-story complex is Tucker Anthony's 600-square-foot (55-square-meter) suite where the company is rebuilding its front-office data, including human resources, operations and accounting records.
A handful of technical employees have made the trek there for 10 days, but the company hopes to close its make-shift center and move to a temporary location in downtown Manhattan during the week of Sept. 24, said Tucker Anthony's Paul Stringer, who heads the technology operations at the site.
Stringer, who works in the windowless data room, said the company's recovery plan, set up 4 years ago, worked as hoped.
The company backed up its data daily and had the tapes picked up early that morning by data storage firm Iron Mountain Inc.(NYSE: IRM - news ).
"(Iron Mountain) sends the data up to IBM.
We meet them up here.
They load the tapes and we try to start up transmission services," Stringer explained.
IBM wasn't the only company helping businesses based in the financial district relocate and reconfigure.
Wayne, Pennsylvania-based SunGard Data Systems (
NYSE: SDS - news ) and Rosemont, Illinois-based Comdisco Inc. (NYSE: CDO - news ), which recently filed for bankruptcy, both said they had at least two dozen customers they were working with after the attacks.
IBM declined to break out revenues for the business continuity division.
The business is set up like the insurance business -- customers pay monthly fees of $100 a month to $1 million for a recovery plan.
After the disaster occurs, IBM then charges a daily fee for using the location, said business continuity and recovery services general manager Todd Gordon.
Gary Helmig, an analyst at SoundView Technology says that IBM's emphasis on providing a broad range of services, including disaster recovery, will benefit the company going forward.
"Comdisco and a Sungard will be providing recovery services but they don't provide the total outsourcing of the data center," Helmig explained. 
An extradition hearing in London for an Algerian wanted by the United States for allegedly plotting with Saudi-born militant Osama bin Laden ( news - web sites ) to bomb Los Angeles airport was postponed on Friday until next month.
Amar Makhnulif was due to appear in court on Friday but the hearing was postponed until October 26, a spokesman for Bow St. Magistrates Court said.
Makhnulif, known as Abu Doha and "The Doctor," was arrested in July at London's Heathrow Airport while trying to board a plane to Saudi Arabia.
The U.S. government has charged that he oversaw a group of Algerian "terrorists" plotting to bomb Los Angeles International Airport before the millennium celebrations and met bin Laden to co-ordinate efforts.
The United States has named bin Laden as chief suspect in the September 11 suicide hijack attacks on the World Trade Center in New York and the Pentagon ( news - web sites ) in Washington.
Assistant U.S. Attorney David Kelley said Makhnulif conspired with others "to use a weapon of mass destruction...in the United States close in time to the millennium celebrations in December 1999 and January 2000.
"
The most serious charges against Makhnulif are conspiracy to use weapons of mass destruction against U.S. citizens and conspiracy to commit acts of terrorism transcending national boundaries.
Both charges are punishable by life imprisonment.
He is also charged with providing material support to bin Laden's al Qaeda group.
The charges against Makhnulif arose out of the federal prosecutions of a group of Algerians who had planned to attack U.S. targets, including Los Angeles International Airport, before the millennium celebrations.
The plot unraveled when authorities arrested Ahmed Ressam as he tried to cross into the United States from Canada with a car full of explosives.
Ressam, who was convicted in April, has implicated Maknulif as a key figure in the plot. 
The United States on Saturday urged Afghanistan ( news - web sites )'s future government to include both genders, saying the Taliban's repression of women had crippled the country like cutting the wing off a bird.
It peppered a State Department report called "The Taliban's War Against Women" with quotes from members of the collapsing hard-line Islamic movement and from ordinary people, revealing horrors Afghan women have endured since 1996.
"The Afghan people want, and the U.S. government supports, a broad-based representative government, which includes women, in post-Taliban Afghanistan," the report said.
"We believe any future Afghan government should be multi-ethnic, representative, and respect human rights, including those affecting women and girls," it quoted Under Secretary of State for Global Affairs Paula Dobriansky as saying.
Taliban members raped, abducted and forced women to marry, the report said, adding that families sent daughters to Pakistan or Iran for protection.
An estimated 50,000 widows of war were forced to beg, or worse, by Taliban laws against women working, the report said.
"Afghan society is like a bird with two wings.
If one wing is cut off, then society will not function," it quoted an Afghan elder as telling a refugee activist.
The old regime's education minister had a different view.
"It's like having a flower, or a rose.
You water it and keep it at home for yourself, to look at it and smell it.
It (a woman) is not supposed to be taken out of the house to be smelled."
In a striking example of the impact of Taliban rule, the report recounted how a young mother left her home without a male escort because her baby was sick.
Seeing her alone, a teenage guard shot her and her baby who were only saved because witnesses intervened.
"The Taliban has clamped down on knowledge, and ignorance is ruling instead," said Sadriqa, a 22-year-old woman in Kabul.
"The life of Afghan women is so bad.
We are locked at home and cannot see the sun," said Najeeba, a 35-year-old widow.
Women suffered burns to the throat from swallowing battery acid in attempts to kill themselves, things were so awful under Taliban's rule, the report said.
Life had been different before.
"There was a mood of tolerance and openness as the country began moving toward democracy," it said.
Pre-Taliban, 70 percent of schoolteachers, half of government workers and 40 percent of doctors in Kabul were women, the report said.
It quoted Nasima, 35, as describing Taliban rules like this: "They won't let us go to school because they want us to be illiterate like them."
Top Bush administration officials hit Sunday talk shows to reject criticism of the government's response to deadly anthrax attacks at home and errant bombings in Afghanistan ( news - web sites ).
Officials said the U.S.-led military response against Afghanistan's ruling Taliban and the al Qaeda network it harbors was proceeding as expected, with air strikes already having some success in disrupting the Taliban's activities.
Seeking to downplay a quick U.S. victory in Afghanistan, the officials said the military campaign could take months even years.
But they insisted the U.S. government had the resolve and patience to win the war.
White House chief of staff Andrew Card and others rejected criticism of the government's handling of security measures after mail was tainted with anthrax, saying the government responded as quickly as it could to protect postal workers.
Two Washington mail handlers died last week, angering some postal officials who accused the government of acting too slow to protect workers who handled a letter to Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle, while U.S. lawmakers and their staff were immediately tested for the deadly bacteria.
"We have a brand new threat to this country that almost no one could have anticipated -- anthrax showing up in the mail -- and we are working very hard with very little evidence," Card told NBC's "Meet the Press" on Sunday.
Authorities waited nearly a week to start testing postal workers at the Brentwood facility in Washington, which processes mail for the U.S. Capitol and other areas.
"The early days of any battle introduce what's called the fog of war and we're still looking through that fog to find the truth," he said.
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld told ABC's "This Week" that the government was now doing everything possible to protect U.S. citizens against further exposure to anthrax, which was developed as a germ warfare agent by the former Soviet Union, the United States and other states such as Iraq.
In addition to the anthrax outbreak, the administration this week faced setbacks on the front lines of the war in Afghanistan, including the bombing of a Red Cross complex in Kabul and the execution of a top opposition leader.
Rumsfeld acknowledged there were setbacks, but said the military campaign was "going very much as expected.
"
"It's not a quagmire at all, it's been three weeks that we've been engaged in this," Rumsfeld told reporters.
He acknowledged that U.S. planes inadvertently bombed the Red Cross warehouse and a residential area nearby, but accused the Taliban of manipulating the news.
"When there's a bomb that goes down, they grab some women and children and pretend the bomb hit the women and children," he told reporters.
The bombing of the Red Cross warehouse was the second time since the U.S.-led bombing of Afghanistan began on Oct. 7.
Washington's efforts have also been set back by the execution of Abdul Haq, a top Afghan opposition commander, caught by the Taliban last week in Afghanistan.
Card said Haq had been working with U.S. forces, but denied he was on a specific Central Intelligence Agency ( news - web sites ) mission.
"It is unfortunate that he did become a victim of this war.
He was a strong leader and we had hopes that he would be part of a leadership effort in post-Taliban Afghanistan," he said.
Card said the U.S. government had responded well to the Sept. 11 attacks.
"We've got a president who is clearly in charge," Card said as Bush huddled with his national security team at Camp David, the presidential retreat, plotting the United States' next move in Afghanistan. 
ADVERTISEMENT
A witchcraft controversy brewing in a North Dakota town forced a local school to cancel a field trip to a screening of the new Harry Potter ( news - web sites ) movie on Friday.
About 100 students from Agassiz Middle School in Fargo were slated to attend the opening day of the widely anticipated movie, " Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone ," which revolves around the adventures of a young wizard in a world of nonmagical mortals known as muggles.
All the students, mainly aged between 12 and 15, had parental permission to attend the trip to a local movie house during school hours.
But a few concerned parents and one local radio personality successfully killed the trip after raising concerns about the movie's depiction of witchcraft.
The fact that some consider witchcraft a religion, the protesters said, meant that the school-led trip to the movie theater would constitute a violation of the separation of church and state and possibly lead to legal action.
"It's a little bizarre," said Fargo School Superintendent David Flowers, who supported the field trip.
"We believe that we were on firm ground in letting the kids go.
But (the school) made the decision ... that they would just as soon not be embroiled in a controversy."
Meanwhile in Memphis at least two Catholic schools said they were keeping the series of "Harry Potter" books by author J.K. Rowling ( news - web sites ) out of their libraries because of the witches and wizardry content.
"Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone" opened on Friday throughout the United States and was widely expected to break box-office records.
U.S. warplanes bombed Taliban positions behind the front lines north of Kabul on Tuesday, targeting tanks and artillery which look down on the opposition-held Bagram airbase.
Ten explosions could be seen around Kubacha and Mirsambat in the morning as warplanes flew high above the Shomali plain for about an hour.
The opposition Northern Alliance has called on the United States to step up air attacks on the enemy north of Kabul.
Its commander welcomed the use of B-52 heavy bombers to strafe strips of ground and carpet-bomb small areas, but Taliban reinforcements have been reported arriving at the front in their hundreds almost every day.
Washington appears to be putting pressure on the alliance to seize the initiative and take some territory from the Taliban, but the army is ill-equipped for an all-out offensive and there have been few real signs of an impending push.
But the Pakistan-based Afghan Islamic Press said the alliance had captured a northern district from the Taliban on Tuesday after five hours of overnight fighting.
Opposition commander Mustafah, watching the jet fighters circling well out of the range of Taliban anti-aircraft guns, said that there were six tanks in the hills of Kubacha which helped to render Bagram useless by firing on the airstrip.
"This is an important position for the Taliban," the commander said stroking his long black beard.
"If the tanks can be taken out, then it means we are closer to using Bagram for takeoffs and landings."
Mustafah lay on the roof of his house, his pet yellow canary in a cage next to him, pointing to the sky when he spotted the fighter jets gleaming against the sun.
The last three blasts struck Niaziah, which lies some one mile behind the Taliban front lines east of Bagram.
WASHINGTON/NEW YORK (Reuters) -
A week after nightmare attacks in New York and Washington which left more than 5,000 people dead or missing, Afghanistan ( news - web sites ) gave mixed signals over the fate of prime suspect Osama bin Laden ( news - web sites ), whom President Bush ( news - web sites ) said he wants "dead or alive."
Some reports said the Afghanistan's ruling Taliban might be prepared to hand over the Saudi-born exile under certain conditions, including trial in a neutral Islamic country.
As many Americans observed a moment of silence at 8:48 a.m. EDT, exactly one week after the first plane slammed into the World Trade Center, investors held their breath to see if U.S. share prices would again plunge on Tuesday after Wall Street suffered its largest point loss ever.
Commerce Secretary Donald Evans said Bush was considering direct financial aid to help U.S. airlines reeling from the fallout of last week's aerial attacks on New York and Washington.
Airline shares suffered the heaviest selling on Monday.
With layoffs already under way, airline executives were due to meet with Transportation Secretary Norman Mineta ( news - web sites ) on Tuesday to review a request for $24 billion in government aid.
While Bush sought to build a strong international coalition for a possible attack on Afghanistan, which harbors bin Laden as a "guest," some world leaders who condemned the attacks sounded alarm bells at the prospect of American military strikes.
Washington's NATO ( news - web sites ) allies have generally voiced full support for declared war on terrorism, but China said any U.S. military action should avoid harming innocent people and should respect international law.
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak ( news - web sites ), whose country is a key U.S. ally in the Middle East, has also said the United States should think twice before taking military action that would kill civilians.
And Germany, a key U.S. ally voiced caution.
"We need to react with a cool head," Joschka Fischer said.
Reports in Pakistani newspapers raised the possibility that the Taliban could be ready for negotiations.
The Taliban might be prepared to give bin Laden up under certain conditions, according to the reports in the Nation and Jang newspapers.
The reports could not be independently confirmed.
The conditions included the trial of bin Laden in a neutral Islamic country, lifting of U.N. sanctions against the Taliban, economic assistance and suspension of foreign aid and military supplies to the Afghan opposition, said the reports.
But a senior Afghan cleric also said the Taliban would launch a "jihad" or holy war against the United States if it attacks militarily, although officials of the Islamic movement quickly said the final decision lay with a council of clerics due to convene this week.
That council on Tuesday postponed for 24 hours a discussion on the fate of bin Laden.
A Pakistani delegation is in the Afghan capital of Kabul, trying to convince the Taliban it must hand over bin Laden or face a U.S. strike.
Washington has been rallying an international coalition for a war on "terrorism" after three hijacked airliners reduced to rubble the twin towers of the World Trade Center, a symbol of U.S. financial might, and wrecked a wing of the Pentagon ( news - web sites ), headquarters of America's powerful military.
Another plane crashed in Pennsylvania after passengers reportedly overpowered the hijackers.
Preparing the nation for a long, hard war and vowing justice for those killed in the coordinated assaults Bush issued a warning to the Taliban.
"All I can tell you is that Osama bin Laden is a prime suspect, and the people who house him, encourage him, provide food, comfort or money are on notice," Bush said, adding: "And the Taliban must take my statement seriously."
Governments around the world tightened security at borders, airports and military bases.
Pentagon ( news - web sites )
officials said on Friday they were encouraged by reports anti-Taliban forces had entered the strategic Afghan crossroads city of Mazar-i-Sharif, but they cautioned that it would take time to determine whether the city had clearly fallen to the opposition.
But "the situation on the ground is fluid.
Until things settle and we see where forces are after a day or two, our inclination is to withhold comment," Clarke told a briefing as U.S. warplanes bombed the ruling Taliban for a 34th day.
If confirmed, the fall of Mazar-i-Sharif after a day of intense fighting would be the most significant gain against the Taliban since U.S. air strikes on Afghanistan ( news - web sites ) began on Oct. 7.
Vice President Dick Cheney ( news - web sites ) said the city, with a population of about 400,000, was in a key strategic location and if it fell to the opposition that would open up a land route to Uzbekistan to bring in supplies to the Northern Alliance.
But he shied away from saying whether U.S. troops based in Uzbekistan would then move into Afghanistan.
"I don't think of it so much as U.S. forces moving into Afghanistan as just opening up a route that will make it a lot easier to get equipment, supplies, ammunition and so forth into the Northern Alliance than it has been up until now," Cheney said in an interview with the London Sun.
But on another key city, the Afghan capital Kabul, the United States was not encouraging the Northern Alliance to try and take it, Secretary of State Colin Powell ( news - web sites ) said.
"Our indications are and our thinking is that it might be best that they not go into Kabul," Powell said on Fox News.
"To be frank there would probably be a high level of tension in the city if the Northern Alliance were to come in force with a population in Kabul that may not at the moment be friendly to the Northern Alliance," he said.
"So it might be a better course of action to let it become an open city if we get to that point and then bring in others to begin to stand up a new Afghan government or provide some sort of interim arrangement," Powell said.
"But we're some time away from having to face those kinds of questions and problems," he added.
The United States, however, would view opposition capture of Mazar-i-Sharif as a cause for celebration, but defense officials said they did not want to jump the gun and declare victory unless it looked like it would hold.
"There is a lot of dust in the air right now.
There are skirmishes happening across the various fronts ... and with that dust in the air it's very hard to tell exactly what's going on," Navy Rear Adm. John Stufflebeem said.
The Northern Alliance could not claim Mazar-i-Sharif until it had quashed any Taliban counter-attacks, Stufflebeem, a senior operations officer on the military's Joint Staff, said.
"We're hearing that perhaps the entire city has been taken, that the Taliban is collapsing, that there are lots of defections, and that's all wonderful -- and I can't confirm a single thing," another U.S. defense official said.
"I hope it's all true," he added.
The U.S. military is receiving information on the situation from "spotty bits of intelligence" based on overhead imagery and a few phone calls from opposition leaders to U.S. forces, the defense official told Reuters.
The most important verification will come with time, he said.
"We don't know that the Taliban are not strategically withdrawing, gathering for a counter attack and 48 hours from now we'll be right back where we started from," the defense official said on condition of anonymity.
Stufflebeem said the United States had pounded the Taliban and al Qaeda guerrilla forces of fugitive Osama bin Laden ( news - web sites ) with 8,000 bombs in its air campaign to date and that various opposition groups were turning the country into "a war zone."
He said fighting of varying intensity was going on throughout much of the country between the Taliban and opposition groups.
"I think it would be fair to characterize the entirety of Afghanistan as an active war zone.
And I think from day to day, or maybe even from some hours to the next, it may be hotter in one place than the next," Stufflebeem said.
The United States says the Taliban are harboring Saudi-born fugitive bin Laden, accused by Washington of masterminding the Sept. 11 attacks on America that killed about 4,600 people.
The Pentagon said the aircraft carrier USS John Stennis would leave California on Monday, ahead of schedule, for waters near Afghanistan to relieve the USS Carl Vinson and keep three American carriers operating against the Taliban.
Eight foreign aid workers detained by the Taliban on charges of spreading Christianity arrived in Islamabad on Thursday after their dramatic rescue from Afghanistan ( news - web sites ) by U.S. special forces.
They arrived at the Chaklala military air base in Islamabad after U.S. helicopters swooped at night into a field in central Afghanistan and lifted them to freedom.
The two Americans, two Australians and four Germans -- all working for German-based Shelter Now International (SNI) -- were whisked away in a motorcade, accompanied by ambassadors and officials of their countries.
"It was like a miracle," said Georg Taubmann, head of SNI in Afghanistan.
He said the aid workers had been taken by the Taliban during their retreat from Kabul and held in a prison in Ghazni, about 50 miles (80 km) southwest of Kabul.
The area came under heavy bombardment, Taubmann told reporters outside the German embassy in Islamabad, and then Northern Alliance fighters burst into the prison -- receiving a shock when they found the foreign detainees.
"This effort involved many people and several entities.
U.S. forces performed the extraction well and the American people can be proud of them," Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said in a statement.
"The detainees are now in Pakistan.
They seem to be in good physical condition," the Pentagon ( news - web sites ) statement said.
Three Special Operations helicopters buzzed into a field near Ghazni and picked up the aid workers who had been in Taliban detention on charges of proselytizing since August 5, the Pentagon said.
After the Taliban spirited the eight out of the capital, Kabul, as they retreated from the city late on Monday, there had been fears they were effectively hostages and would be used as a human shield by the militia.
Few details of their release were available but one defense official said it was a result of "non-confrontational" negotiations between the Taliban and international agencies.
Some reports said they had effectively been swapped for Taliban fighters besieged in the enclave of Kunduz, the militia's last redoubt in the north of the country.
"Today we've got incredibly good news.
Our United States military rescued eight humanitarian workers who had been imprisoned in Afghanistan," President Bush ( news - web sites ) said.
He said he had been worried that the Taliban would take the aid workers to a building that could have been bombed by the U.S.-led war in Afghanistan and had considered different ways they could be rescued.
The cockpit voice recorder recovered from American Airlines Flight 587 captured the sound of the plane loudly rattling twice before the pilots lost control after taking off from New York, investigators said on Tuesday as they sought the cause of the crash that killed up to 265 people.
Evidence from the plane, the voice recorder recovered along with the flight data recorder, and the crash site near New York's John F. Kennedy International Airport initially yielded no signs of internal engine failure or a criminal act, said officials with the National Transportation Safety Board ( news - web sites ).
But, said NTSB ( news - web sites ) investigator George Black at a late afternoon news conference, "We're not ruling anything out at this point.
"
The plane, bound for Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, took off at 9:14 a.m. Monday.
It split apart and crashed nose first about two minutes later, setting fire to a dozen homes in the working-class seaside neighborhood of Rockaway in Queens.
The inferno killed 251 passengers, nine crew members and at least five people on the ground.
Four more people on the ground were reported missing.
Black said witnesses saw the plan wobble before falling into a steep spiral.
Listening to the cockpit voice recorder, the rattling of the frame of the Airbus A300-600 can be heard 107 seconds after the pilots powered up the engines and again 14 seconds later, Black said.
The timing of that shaking still must be matched with the flight data recorder and with radar to get a better understanding of what it means, investigators said.
Midway between the two rattling sounds, the captain can be heard remarking that he was encountering the wake of a plane ahead of him, he said.
That plane was a Japan Airlines (JAL)
Boeing 747, which took off about 2 1/2 minutes before Flight 587, Black said.
Two minutes is the normal time separation for departures, he said.
All aircraft produce wake turbulence -- spirals of air that trail from the wingtips that can be a particular hazard when smaller aircraft follow a larger plane.
There have been some instances where wake turbulence causes structural damage, according to a Federal Aviation Administration ( news - web sites ) brochure for pilots.
The FAA requires that these types of aircraft must be four miles apart.
Aviation sources said they believed these plane were further apart, and the NTSB said it had yet to determine the exact distance between the two.
After the second rattling, the co-pilot can be heard asking for maximum power, Black said.
Then there are "several comments suggesting a loss of control" of the plane.
Just 20 seconds passed between the sound of the first rattle and the pilots' loss of control.
The tape ended 17 seconds later, only 144 seconds after the engines are first heard.
Asked how loud the rattling was, Black said, "It was significant enough for them to make note of it."
"Sounds are important," he said.
"All sorts of clunks and clinks can be identified."
The voice recorder tape is 30 minutes and 38 seconds long and of good quality, he said.
Investigators said at a Tuesday night briefing they had identified all of the major pieces of the plane and had begun more detailed scrutiny of some parts.
The plane's engines appeared to be in one piece, Black noted.
Algeria's worst floods in at least 20 years have left over 340 people dead, with more bodies being found on Sunday in the hard-hit capital Algiers.
The government offered aid for stricken families after an emergency cabinet meeting, but the gesture came too late to save the country's leaders from fierce attacks by newspapers, which said they were warned of the disaster but did nothing."Criminal negligence," "Carelessness" and "Desertion of duty" were typical headlines on Sunday.
Rescue services found more corpses in the debris in Algiers, and said the death toll had passed 340 -- three quarters of them in the hilly capital itself, home to some 3.5 million people.
Dozens of people were reported missing, state media said.
Heavy rain and strong gales on Friday and Saturday lashed coastal parts of the country -- Africa's second largest which extends far south into the Sahara desert --, and meteorologists forecast no major let-up in the bad weather before Wednesday.
"It was the worst flooding in at least two decades," one said.
Prime Minister Ali Benflis told parliament after the cabinet meeting the government would give about $1,300 in emergency aid to each family which lost one or more members.
Additionally, families whose homes were badly damaged would receive about $2,600 and shelter would be provided for up to 1,500 families who had lost their homes.
State media said at least 300 people had been injured and some 5,500 families left homeless in Algiers and elsewhere.
France, former colonial master of the North African state, sent a rescue team to Algiers after the government called for international aid to help deal with the "national catastrophe."
Algiers' working-class district of Bab el Oued was the worst hit, with 150 of its people perishing as muddy waters rushed through its narrow streets.
"The neighborhood is at the foot of a hill -- water poured down and swamped the area," one resident said.
Rescue workers said victims had been buried under the rubble of their collapsed homes, or hit by falling trees and power lines or had died in car accidents.
Hamid Attouche, who lives on the edge of Bab el Oued, said he saw from his apartment balcony dozens of people being washed away by torrents of water, and drowning.
"Some raised their arms in despair but we could do nothing, many drowned right there in front of our eyes, we were helpless," he said.
Khelifa Megbel clutched rolls of mud-stained cloth, all that was left from his fabric store.
"It was a surreal sight, I could see trucks, buses being swept away," he said.
Mourad Morsli, summing up the mood of the poor in the neighborhood, said: "We see nothing coming from the government despite all the talk about aid.
"Anyway, we expect no help from the government because we have been living here in poverty for 20 years and no one has ever helped us before," he added.
Algiers residents said the city center was effectively cut off from the suburbs on Sunday.
However, some schools, shops, government offices, banks and other businesses had reopened.
Authorities asked residents with no urgent business in central Algiers to avoid it until Wednesday, the official APS news agency said.
Newspapers were united in criticism of the government.
"The reality of the disaster showed a decaying country and leaders who don't care whether a citizen dies from natural catastrophes, terrorism or other calamities," Le Jeune Independent daily said.
The influential El Watan newspaper added: "No warning to the population was given and no steps taken to limit the impact of the disaster -- the authorities showed unbelievable negligence."
The floods hit Algeria as world environment and energy ministers struck a deal in neighboring Morocco on Saturday on the landmark Kyoto climate change treaty.
Its long-term aim is to curb what U.N. scientists say is the artificial warming of the Earth's climate and its consequences: increased flooding, changing rainfall patterns, severe heat waves, more frequent droughts and rising sea levels.
A Pakistani newspaper that says it interviewed Osama bin Laden ( news - web sites ) reported Sunday that the Saudi-born militant said he knew nothing about anthrax-tainted letters sent to U.S. media and government offices.
Hamid Mir, editor of the Urdu-language Ausaf newspaper, says he held a two-hour interview with bin Laden in the early hours of Thursday morning at a secret location in Afghanistan ( news - web sites ) after a bone-jarring five-hour jeep ride from Kabul.
In a second account of the interview published Sunday, the newspaper said that when bin Laden was asked whether his al Qaeda network was behind the anthrax attacks, "he laughed and said we don't know anything about it."
In the first accounts of Mir's interview, the respected Dawn newspaper said Saturday that bin Laden, prime suspect for the deadly September 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon ( news - web sites ), said he had nuclear and chemical weapons and might use them in response to U.S. attacks on Afghanistan.
"I wish to declare that if America used chemical or nuclear weapons against us, then we may retort with chemical and nuclear weapons.
We have the weapons as deterrent," bin Laden was quoted as saying.
An account of the same interview published in Ausaf on Saturday contained no mention of bin Laden's claim to have nuclear weapons.
But Sunday Ausaf said the Saudi-born militant had indeed made the claim.
The paper said bin Laden had declined to say where he got the weapons, but had told Mir he suspected the U.S. was using chemical weapons in Afghanistan because "bodies of mujahideen found from a site in Kabul had all turned black."
U.S. President George Bush Saturday told the U.N. General Assembly global terrorism could soon involve nuclear attacks.
He said those responsible for the September 11 attacks were seeking nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.
"These same terrorists are searching for weapons of mass destruction, the tools to turn their hatred into holocausts," he said, speaking just a few miles from the wreckage of the World Trade Center. "
This threat cannot be ignored, this threat cannot be appeased...
Civilization itself is threatened."
Bush told a news conference Saturday he did not know whether bin Laden already had such weapons.
British Defense Secretary Geoff Hoon told the BBC Sunday that bin Laden did have some nuclear material.
"We are certainly aware that he has some material that could contribute to a nuclear weapon.
We are not convinced at this stage that he is capable of producing a nuclear bomb," he said.
Mir told Reuters he was picked up in Kabul Wednesday night, blindfolded, wrapped in a blanket and bundled into the back of a jeep for a five-hour journey to meet bin Laden.
Mir said that when his blindfold was taken off, he found himself in a room, where bin Laden arrived with about a dozen bodyguards and Ayman Zawahri, a top lieutenant in al Qaeda.
"The floor of the room showed that this was a mud house arranged temporarily for the interview.
On regular intervals one could hear anti-aircraft guns, so it was not difficult to guess that it was close to the front line," Mir wrote in Sunday's edition of Ausaf.
"Osama bin Laden looked confident, healthy and fresh."
Independent experts say it is unlikely bin Laden has developed a nuclear capability.
The Pakistani government last month dismissed as absurd international media reports that bin Laden had obtained nuclear material from Pakistan.
The New York Times reported in Sunday editions that two Afghan sites suspected of involvement in efforts by bin Laden and his al Qaeda followers to produce deadly chemicals had been identified by the United States.
"American officials say the intelligence reports showing the possible production of small quantities of cyanide gas provide the strongest indication they have received of al Qaeda's success in its efforts to develop chemical weapons," the paper said.
Stocks fell sharply on Thursday, as more corporate earnings warnings and massive layoffs piled atop deep economic and military uncertainties plaguing investors since last week's air attacks on New York's World Trade Center and the Pentagon ( news - web sites ) outside of Washington.
Selling persisted for a fourth day since the market reopened after the devastating Sept. 11 terror attacks on the twin towers.
Wall Street, mourning the likely loss of nearly 6,000 people at the Trade Center just three blocks from the New York Stock Exchange ( news - web sites ), has pushed the major stock indexes down more than 10 percent to new three-year lows this week.
The Dow Jones industrial average ( DJI - news ) tumbled 382.92 points, or 4.37 percent, to end at 8,376.21, the seventh largest point drop ever.
It was the lowest close for the Dow since October 1998.
On Monday, the Dow fell nearly 690 points, the biggest ever point loss.
The Nasdaq composite ( IXIC - news ) plunged 56.87 points, or 3.72 percent, to 1,470.93, its lowest finish since also since October 1998, and the benchmark Standard & Poor's 500 index ( SPX - news ) fell 31.56 points, or 3.11 percent, to 984.54.
"Anyone who bought yesterday looks like a moron today.
And if you buy today, you're worried you're going to be looking like a moron tomorrow," said Dominic Freud, head of European trading at S.G. Cowen in New York.
"The likelihood of looking like an idiot next week is quite high."
Applied Materials Inc. (
Nasdaq: AMAT - news ), the leading microchip equipment maker, joined a long list of other companies such as airliner American Airlines and publisher The Tribune Co.
(NYSE: TRB - news ) in dishing out bleak news.
U.S. Federal Reserve ( news - web sites )
Chairman Alan Greenspan ( news - web sites ) told Congress that the attacks will damage the economy in the short-term by making Americans fearful of the future but won't dampen bright long-term prospects.
The central bank has cut interest rates eight times this year to buoy the economy.
"What we're seeing here is a continued uncertainty in the market, lack of institutional buying," said Uri Landesman, chief investment officer with AFA Management Partners.
"And so people are just waiting and seeing what happens here; What the (U.S.) response is going to be like?
Are there going to be any more terrorist attacks?" 
Stocks slipped on Monday as investors readied for a rush of corporate scorecards amid the rising threat of bioterrorism and a second week of air strikes in Afghanistan ( news - web sites ). 
"In the short term, I don't see much light," said George Rodriguez, senior vice president of equities at Guzman & Co.
"However, as we look further down I can only be positive toward the economy and various sectors.
This economy is not shattered and will not be shattered." 
This week marks the most hectic period for third-quarter earnings, with 180 of the Standard & Poor's 500 companies set to post their results.
Analysts expect the biggest drop in earnings in a decade as the economy struggles to escape recession, according to research firm Thomson Financial/First Call. 
The market moved off its lows in the late morning, but tension remained.
The United States took its military campaign in Afghanistan into a second week to force the ruling Taliban to hand over Osama bin Laden ( news - web sites ), while cases of anthrax in Nevada, New York and Florida have fueled fears of a biological assault on the nation. 
Monday's winners included companies that may be crucial to combating a chemical or biological attack, but chip stocks slumped amid worries over corporate profits.
Investment house J.P Morgan cuts its rating on chips makers like PMC-Sierra Inc. (
PMCS.O), saying the stocks were too pricey. 
The technology-laced Nasdaq Composite Index (.IXIC) shed 15.16 points, or 0.89 percent, at 1,688.24, after falling more than 2 percent.
The blue-chip Dow Jones industrial average (.DJI) lost 67.32 points, or 0.72 percent, at 9,276.84, after losing more than 1 percent.
The broader Standard & Poor's 500 Index (.SPX) was down 7.54 points, or 0.69 percent, at 1,084.11. 
Stocks had rallied in the past three weeks, boosted by a handful of upbeat corporate results and hopes that increased government spending and lower interest rates will spur economic growth.
But investors are keeping up their guard as the government promises a lengthy war on terrorism after the Sept. 11 attacks. 
Cepheid Inc. (CPHD.O), whose products help detect biological agents, jumped more than 11 percent, or 90 cents to $8.68.
Detection system maker Nanogen Inc. (NGEN.O) rose 76 cents to $9.37.
Both added to stellar gains last week as anthrax cases fuel fears of biological warfare. 
The Philadelphia Stock Exchange semiconductor index (.SOXX) fell 4.60 percent.
Intel Corp. (INTC.O), the world's No. 1 maker of computer chips, dropped 68 cents to $24.34, pressuring both the Nasdaq and the Dow ahead of its earnings after Tuesday's close. 
JP Morgan cut its rating on five communications chip makers, saying the stocks are overvalued.
Applied Micro Circuits Corp. (AMCC.O) fell $1.41 to $11.69.
Xilinx Inc. (XLNX.O) dropped $2.23 to 29.63.
Altera Corp. (ALTR.O) lost $2.33 to $20.82.
PMC-Sierra sank $1.97 to $16.83.
Vitesse Semiconductor Corp. (VTSS.O) surrendered $1.03 to $10.32. 
United Therapeutics Corp.
(UTHR.O) sank $6.03 to $10.33.
The company said preliminary results of a U.S. trial of a compound for treatment of intermittent pain when walking resulting from peripheral vascular disease did not confirm the findings of an earlier trial in Europe. 
Dutch banking and insurance group ING Groep NV (ING.N) fell $4.26 to $24.
The company joined the list of financial firms suffering from the global slowdown, slashing its 2001 profit forecast and sending its shares tumbling more than 14 percent. 
Profits for S&P 500 Index companies are expected to shrink by 22.4 percent this quarter, making it the worst quarter since the second quarter of 1991, according to Thomson Financial/First Call. 
ADVERTISEMENT
European bourses extended gains by mid-session on Tuesday, led by technology stocks and a relieved Airbus parent EADS, as security fears eased and traders glimpsed a ray of light in the Afghan gloom.
By noon GMT, the FTSE Eurotop 300 index was 2.7 percent higher, while the narrower DJ Euro Stoxx 50 and DJ Stoxx 50 indices of euroland and pan-European blue chips rose 3.3 percent and 3.1 percent respectively.
And with U.S. futures turning higher a bright start to afternoon trade appeared on the cards.
French telecom equipment maker Alcatel led a 4.5 percent advance in tech stocks with a 5.8 percent gain of its own.
The tech sector was buoyed by a strong overnight performance in the Nasdaq 100, which erased initial losses to finish with a 0.9 percent gain after Monday's Airbus A300 plane crash in New York revived memories of September 11 that fizzled away once investigators said they suspected no foul play.
Investors, emboldened by a spate of recent interest rate cuts, have begun to prepare for an economic recovery in the latter half of 2002 by building up positions in sectors offering potentially higher earnings growth, such as technology.
The DJ Stoxx index of European technology stocks has outperformed the broader market by around 20 percent since September 21, when share prices bottomed in the wake of the September 11 attacks in the United States.
But there is concern in some quarters that investors may be getting carried away.
"We are beginning to hear the siren voices tempting equity investors to venture beyond the constraints of earnings-based valuation 'norms' and to factor in a (temporary) return to more inflated equity valuations," Schroder Salomon Smith Barney said in a research note.
Accordingly, Wednesday's U.S. retail sales data will be scrutinized carefully by investors for any evidence that the Federal Reserve ( news - web sites )'s
10 rate cuts so far this year have done enough to sustain fragile U.S. consumer confidence ( news - web sites ) in the face of heightened security concerns and mounting job losses.
The rally was also tempered by a tide of corporate news -- shares in Germany's BASF and Swiss bank UBS underperformed on the back of poor earnings.
added 6.6 percent, propping up prices by bettering analysts expectations on sales and billings.
At the same time, Afghan opposition forces entered the capital Kabul and Taliban fighters fled south toward Kandahar, helping general sentiment on financial markets.
pleased investors by announcing a 26 percent rise in third quarter sales while maintaining its targets for growth in 2001 sales and operating profit.
shares, which fell by as much as nine percent on Monday after the Airbus crash, initially gained upwards of seven percent on Tuesday before easing back as the morning wore on.
Airbus accounts for almost all the group's profits.
Airline stocks also recovered after going into tailspin following Monday's crash, in which up to 269 people are thought to have been killed.
Air France added 5.1 percent, British Airways climbed 4.8 percent and Germany's Lufthansa rose 3.1 percent.
Lufthansa is expected to post a 74 percent drop in third quarter earnings on Wednesday as a result of the September 11 attacks and the resultant slump in airline travel, according to a Reuters poll of analysts.
Markets gradually warmed to results from the world's largest mobile phone operator Vodafone which edged up to stand H2.6 percent higher.
The company reported a better-than-expected rise in first half underlying earnings and margins.
However, acquisition-related write-offs saw the company post a 8.4 billion pound ($12.2 billion) pretax loss.
But it was British Telecommunications which made most of the running in the telecom sector, rallying 5.8 percent.
Dealers said the shares had been marked down too far on Monday, when they tumbled as low as 306p, only just above their five-year low of 300p from September, as analysts continue to scale back their valuations of mmO2, BT's mobile phone business that will be demerged next Monday.
Shares in Switzerland's largest bank, UBS, underperformed the wider market, rising one percent after it announced worse-than-expected third quarter results.
Shares in Europe's largest chemicals group BASF AG were up just 0.5 percent after it posted third-quarter operating profit at the lower end of analysts' expectations.
The group added it expected significantly lower profit on the full year.
Amro cuts its recommendation on BASF to "reduce" from "hold" as the firm announced it would seek approval for a further share buyback at its next AGM.
French advertising group Publicis rose six percent after it produced a 1.4 percent rise in third-quarter billings -- more than expected, considering the industry's most severe downturn in a decade.
Nine-month billings at the world's sixth-largest advertising group were up 4.6 percent.
Blue-chip stocks were pinned lower on Tuesday as Wall Street awaited the U.S. Federal Reserve ( news - web sites )'s decision on interest rates.
A slew of downgrades on industry leaders such as Walt Disney Co. (NYSE: DIS - news ) also weighed on the market.
Technology stocks crept higher as an upbeat outlook from technology bellwether Cisco Systems Inc. (
Nasdaq: CSCO - news ) boosted hopes the battered tech sector may soon see a rebound in sales and profits.
"The news is mixed so stocks are mixed," said Richard Sichel, chief investment officer at Philadelphia Trust Co.
"We've had a decent earnings report by Cisco, but markets have a wait-and-see attitude about the Fed rate cut.
Fifty basis points are better than 25 basis points."
Money managers and traders said there was little doubt the Fed would cut rates.
The only question was how much.
The technology-laced Nasdaq Composite ( IXIC - news ) wavered between gains and losses, most recently gaining 0.25 of a point, or 0.01 percent, at 1,793.90.
Trading was light, with 370 million shares traded on the Big Board and 624 million on Nasdaq.
About 14 stocks fell for every 13 that rose on the New York Stock Exchange ( news - web sites ), while there were eight decliners for every seven gainers on Nasdaq.
Struggling energy giant
Enron tumbled $1.30 to $9.85 -- the lowest since 1992.
The stock, which was the most active on the NYSE, has sunk on accusations the company failed to explain billions of dollars in balance-sheet charges and write-downs.
The broader market has rallied recently on optimism this year's nine rate cuts by the Fed will help get the economy back on its feet.
Wall Street is predicting the central bank will chop rates by as much as a half point, putting them at their lowest level in four decades.
In a Reuters poll on Friday, 15 of the 24 dealers of U.S. government securities predicted the Fed will cut rates by a half point.
That would bring the fed funds rate, which influences borrowing costs across the economy, down to 2 percent.
Still, worries abound.
"You've got terribly grim economic news and most people are in the 50-basis-point camp, but it's not a cut and dried case," said Holly Liss, a technical strategist for Fuji Futures.
"If it turns out to be 25 basis points, stocks may get hurt in here."
The Fed's decision is expected at 2:15 p.m. (1915 GMT).
Lower interest rates can be positive for stocks as they cut borrowing costs and may spur business development.
Cisco was the most-active Nasdaq stock and gained 43 cents to $18.31.
The maker of networking gear that helps power the Internet reported profits that beat estimates.
Cisco said sales rose from the prior quarter, suggesting the worst may be behind the sector.
The company also forecast revenues will be flat to slightly higher in the next quarter.
In addition, Cisco said it had purged $834 million of excess inventory, making progress in shedding $2.2 billion in inventory it is writing off because of weak demand.
Microsoft Corp. (
Nasdaq: MSFT - news ) inched higher by 25 cents to $63.49.
The 18 states in the company's antitrust case said on Tuesday they were split over backing a settlement, with one-third opposed to the deal reached last week between the company and the U.S. Justice Department ( news - web sites ), and another third prepared to sign it.
The remainder were undecided and were granted until later on Tuesday to make up their minds.
Disney weighed on the blue chip Dow average, falling 70 cents to $18.46, after investment bank Goldman Sachs cut its rating on the media giant, citing an anticipated drop in the company's 2002 earnings.
The Philadelphia Flyers ended a four-year regular-season winless streak against the New Jersey Devils at Continental Airlines Arena with a 3-1 victory.
Simon Gagne broke a 1-1 tie 41 seconds into the third period on a backhander low to the right side of goaltender Martin Brodeur after a right circle pass from Mark Recchi .
Brodeur made the initial save on a shot by Keith Primeau , but Recchi quickly directed the puck in front to Gagne, who scored his ninth goal of the season.
Ruslan Fedotenko scored his fourth goal of the season 8:10 later, picking up a loose puck and drilling a slap shot over Brodeur's right shoulder, dealing the Devils their third straight loss.
The Flyers were 0-7-3 at New Jersey since their last win in 1997.
They have won here in the playoffs during that span.
Jan Hlavac scored his fifth goal of the season 7:24 into the second period with a backhander from the right side through Brodeur.
Just over seven minutes later, Bobby Holik tied it with a one-timer from the slot after a nice feed from Randy McKay behind the net.
Jay Pandolfo beat Eric Desjardins to a dumped puck by the back boards.
Pandolfo chipped the puck to McKay, who followed the play and passed to an unmarked Holik, who beat goaltender Roman Cechmanek through the legs.
In Tampa, Florida, Nikolai Khabibulin stopped 26 shots and Ben Clymer scored his first goal in nine games to break a scoreless tie as the Tampa Bay Lightning blanked the sputtering Carolina Hurricanes, 2-0.
Making his sixth straight start, Khabibulin made nine saves in the first period, eight in the second and nine in the third for his second shutout of the season and 23rd of his career.
He also whitewashed Los Angeles on October 25.
Clymer got credit for his fifth goal of the season and first since October 27 when his wraparound from the left faceoff circle 12:08 into the third period caromed off the right skate of Carolina defenseman Glen Wesley , who was battling Tampa Bay's Fredrik Modin in the crease.
Tim Taylor added an empty-net goal with 17 seconds left when Josef Vasicek of the Hurricanes made an ill-advised drop pass in his own zone to teammate Sami Kapanen .
Taylor dove and pushed it into the open net for his second goal of the season and second in as many games.
Carolina's Tom Barrasso stopped 23 shots but was victimized by a bad bounce as the Hurricanes' winless streak reached four games on the heels of a five-game unbeaten run.
Tampa Bay improved to 2-2-0 on a five-game homestand that concludes Tuesday against Anaheim.
In Washington, Adam Oates scored his first goal of the season and handed out three assists as the Washington Capitals defeated the slumping Mighty Ducks of Anaheim, 4-1, for just their second win in 10 games.
The Capitals had a 2-1 lead 15:41 late in the second period when Oates took a pass from Ulf Dahlen in front of the net and tipped the puck past goaltender Jean-Sebastien Giguere for his first goal since March 7.
It ended a 30-game drought.
Oates set up Washington's first goal on the power play 3:01 into the game when he passed to Dahlen, whose shot was stopped by Giguere.
After the puck bounced loose in the crease, Jaromir Jagr picked it up and banged it in for his sixth goal.
Olaf Kolzig stopped 29 shots in his 11th consecutive start for the Capitals.
Giguere made 28 saves for Anaheim, which is winless in its last six games and 0-2-0 on a six-game road trip.
In Ottawa, the last time the Ottawa Senators faced the Toronto Maple Leafs , Karel Rachunek was carried from the ice on a stretcher.
He left the ice a hero on Saturday night.
Rachunek squeezed a shot past Curtis Joseph with five seconds left in overtime as the Senators continued their regular-season mastery of the Maple Leafs with a 2-1 victory.
In the season opener on October 3, Rachunek was rammed into the end boards by Darcy Tucker and had his neck and head immobilized as he was taken to a Toronto hospital.
But he missed just two games with a bruised back and played a key role in the latest renewal of the "Battle of Ontario."
Maple Leafs defenseman
Dmitry Yushkevich lost the puck at the Senators blue line and Rachunek carried it all the way into the Toronto zone.
Maple Leafs defenseman Aki Berg went down to cut off a possible pass and Rachunek reached the bottom of the right faceoff circle before flicking a shot over Joseph's left pad and into the net.
It was his first goal since March 26 and first career game-winner.
It also pinned a tough loss on Joseph, who put on a show in the third period and ended up with 25 saves.
Patrick Lalime stopped 28 shots to help the Senators to their seventh consecutive win over their provincial rivals.
Afghanistan ( news - web sites ) (Reuters) -
Afghan opposition Northern Alliance Foreign Minister Abdullah Abdullah said Sunday he could not rule out a possible advance toward Kabul in the next few days.
Asked whether there was a chance Northern Alliance forces just north of Kabul would move forward in coming days, Abdullah told a news conference: "We do not rule it out."
He also said declined to say that his forces would not move into Kabul in the case of political vacuum in Kabul.
"A political vacuum is a different situation and we have to consult with our Afghan partners and our international partners, mainly the U.N.," he said.
He said he had been surprised by the speed of the gains made by his forces in the north in the last 48 hours, and said the Taliban had suffered hundreds of casualties.
"I knew the cracks could produce a sort of domino effect and this could get of their (Taliban) control," he said.
Pakistani Taliban soldiers, some wounded, trickled across the Pakistan border Wednesday, saying the fundamentalist Islamic group were still firmly in charge of their southern Afghan stronghold of Kandahar.
"There are about 40,000 or 50,000 Taliban in Kandahar.
We are making strong defensive positions," Din Mohammad, bearded and clad in the Taliban's trademark turban, told Reuters at the Chaman border crossing.
Mohammad, who said he was returning to Pakistan to see his family, tell them he was all right and recruit more fighters for the Taliban cause, said the militia was regrouping.
Both the capital Kabul and the Western city of Herat have fallen to the opposition Northern Alliance in the five days since the coalition formed mainly of Uzbek and Tajik ethnic minorities threw the Taliban out of the northern city of Mazar-i-Sharif.
Opposition forces say they have already seized Kandahar airport and are advancing on the city.
Northern Alliance Foreign Minister Abdullah Abdullah told Iranian state television that Kandahar was in "total chaos."
The reports could not be independently verified.
The base of Taliban supreme leader Mullah Mohammad Omar, Kandahar is Afghanistan's second largest city and lies in the heart of the Pashtun tribal belt, where Taliban support mainly originates.
A former Mujahideen governor of Kandahar, Gul Agha, entered Afghanistan from Pakistan Tuesday and was heading toward the city, opposition officials say.
But it was unclear how many fighters he had with him.
It appeared to be business as usual Wednesday at the Chaman border crossing, which leads to Kandahar, strategically placed on the ancient Silk Road linking the Far East with central Asia, Persia and the subcontinent.
Taliban troops and police were in total control of their side of the frontier and the number of trucks laden with goods or humanitarian aid crossing to Afghanistan, and the queues of refugees or traders coming back, were normal.
Occasionally, the slow flow of travelers included Taliban fighters, recognizable because of their beards and tightly wound black or white turbans.
One young man, limping on a crutch, denied reports that Kandahar and its airport had been taken from the Taliban.
"These are all bad rumors," he told a crush of reporters, without giving his name.
"All the Taliban forces are ready for jihad (holy war) and inshallah (God willing)
Islam will win."
He said he was coming to Pakistan to have his injuries treated.
Din Mohammad was equally defiant.
"Many Taliban are going toward Herat and we plan to take it back.
We also plan to take back Kabul," he said.
Earlier Wednesday, Afghan opposition leader Hamid Karzai told Reuters from inside Afghanistan that the Taliban were still in control of Kandahar.
But the former deputy foreign minister of a pre-Taliban government said the city's airport had been taken after Taliban forces guarding it declared themselves no longer Taliban.
Karzai, who has been inside central Afghanistan for four weeks drumming up support for the return of ex-King Zahir Shah, said the Taliban were forming defensive positions around the city.
Astronauts on board the space shuttle Endeavour have docked with the International Space Station (ISS) setting the stage for the attachment - and dramatic spreading - of the largest solar wings ever taken into space. 
The docking occurred more than 370 kilometres (230 miles) above central Asia. 
Shuttle commander Brent Jett brought his ship in from below. 
Station commander Bill Shepherd and his two Russian crewmates - on board the ISS now for a month - watched Endeavour's slow and cautious approach. 
The five shuttle astronauts are their first visitors.
The two crews talked to one another via radio, but they will not actually meet for almost a week. 
Because of the difference in air pressure between the two craft, the hatches leading into the ISS's living compartment must remain sealed until the shuttle astronauts complete three spacewalks outside the space station. 
Ahead of Endeavour's arrival, the three-man crew aboard the ISS detached a separate vessel, Progress, from the station as a security measure. 
At the end of Endeavour's 11-day mission, the Progress vessel will be put back in place. 
The operation to install the huge solar panels is due to begin on Sunday. 
astronauts Joe Tanner and Carlos Noriega will perform three spacewalks from Endeavour to attach the $600m panels to the station's exterior, quintupling the station's electrical power. 
Astronaut Marc Garneau will control the shuttle's robotic arm to transfer the power unit and its wings from Endeavour's cargo bay and hold them in space ready for bolting down by the spacewalkers. 
Initially, the wings, which have a span of 73 metres, will be mounted on the station in a folded position.
Computer commands will then open the structures out. 
The wings will provide 64 kilowatts at peak power.
The ISS is in urgent need of this energy. 
One of its three rooms is closed off because there is not enough power to heat it. 
A US lab module cannot be launched to the space station in January as planned unless the solar panels are installed.
Standing in the giant upturned metal bowl that is the Lovell radio telescope, there is no view of the ground and so no indication that you are nearly 100 metres (300 feet) above the Cheshire countryside.
Somehow, I feel as if all that matters is the metal I stand on and the space above. 
Most astronomers who use this giant radio telescope to probe the distant Universe never come up here and walk on the metal plates that reflect radio waves as efficiently as any polished mirror. 
Sometimes they do climb the tower that holds sensitive detectors at the dish's focus to catch the radio waves, then they scurry back down eager to point the dish at some object in space. 
But over the years, the rain and frost has taken its toll and started to corrode the surface.
It needs replacing - over 5000 square metres of it.
It is a big task. 
Space scientists have to deal with miniaturised electronics; optical astronomers have to polish their mirrors to an accuracy of a thousandth of the width of a human hair - but there comes a time when radio astronomers have to start welding sheet metal. 
Examining the old surface, Jodrell Bank's director, Professor Andrew Lyne, told me how the new surface would extend the useful life of the telescope. 
"When the new surface is complete in 2002, this telescope will have as much promise as when it was built all those years ago," he said.
"We will be able to observe at more wavelengths and with greater sensitivity." 
So the bowl of the telescope is now a patchwork quilt of new and old metal plates, as piece by piece the old surface is replaced with one that is more accurate. 
When the big dish rose above the Cheshire plain just over 40 years ago, it was ahead of its time.
The first indication of its importance came not with observations of deep space but with something nearer. 
When Sputnik was launched in 1957, the mighty Jodrell Bank dish was about the only thing that could track it. 
Since then its gaze has been drawn ever outward - to super dense, rapidly spinning stars that flash like celestial lighthouses; to vast clouds where stars are born; to distant galaxies that shout across space using radio waves; and to the luminous beasts that inhabit the edge of the observable Universe. 
The improvements to the main telescope will bring benefits to others as well. 
The Jodrell Bank telescope is the anchor of a network of interconnected radio telescopes spread over the country. 
Improving the Lovell telescope, the biggest of them all, will benefit a system that can take sharper pictures of the cosmos than the Hubble Space Telescope. 
It is going to take another year for the resurfacing to be completed but when it is done the Lovell telescope will be back at the forefront of radio astronomy.
Actually, in many areas of research, it always has been.
The first picture taken through the High Resolution Camera, one of the two X-ray cameras on NASA's Chandra X-ray Observatory, is of the wreckage of a star that exploded in an outrigger galaxy to our own Milky Way. 
Thousands of years ago, in this small companion galaxy called the Large Magellanic Cloud, a star exploded with almost unimaginable violence.
For a few days this so-called supernova explosion outshone an entire galaxy of its companions as its wreckage was scattered into space. 
Thousands of years later the gas is still at millions of degrees and gives off X-rays that Chandra can detect. 
The N132D supernova remnant is a cloud of expanding gas, currently some 80 light years across (that is 20 times the distance between our Sun and the nearest star) that has already swept up enough gas and dust to make 600 suns. 
"These were preliminary test observations," emphasized Dr. Stephen Murray, of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics.
"But we are very pleased with the results.
All indications are that the high resolution camera will produce X-ray images of unprecedented clarity." 
The N132D image shows a highly structured supernova remnant, or shell, of 10-million-degree gas.
Such a shell in the vicinity of the Sun would encompass more than 50 nearby stars.
What is more the N132D supernova remnant appears to be colliding with a giant molecular cloud, which produces the brightening on the southern rim of the remnant. 
The molecular cloud, visible with a radio telescope, has the mass of 300,000 suns.
Astronomers say that the relatively weak X-radiation on the upper left of the image shows that the shock wave is expanding into a less dense region on the edge of the molecular cloud. 
In addition a number of small circular structures are also visible in the central regions and a hint of a large circular loop can be seen in the upper part of the remnant.
Whether the peculiar shape of the supernova remnant can be fully explained in terms of these effects, or whether they point to a peculiar cylindrically shaped explosion remains to be seen. 
"The image is so rich in structure that it will take a while to sort out what is really going on," Murray said.
"It could be multiple supernovas, or absorbing clouds in the vicinity of the supernova." 
Chandra's high resolution X-ray camera can reveal detail as small as a stop sign at a distance of 12 miles.
The observatory is currently going through its checkout procedure.
In the next few weeks, during which time the Chandra science team expects to acquire images of other supernova remnants, star clusters and starburst galaxies.
Scientists have found a piece of the meteorite that many believe killed the dinosaurs. 
The small piece of rock was discovered during an international drilling mission to recover samples from beneath the floor of the Pacific. 
It is only 2.5 mm in size, but a detailed chemical analysis indicates that it is rich in metals and seems typical of a type of meteorite called a carbonaceous chondrite.
This strongly suggests that the body that so devastated the Earth 65 million years ago was an asteroid 10km across. 
The meteorite profoundly changed the evolution of life on Earth - without it, humans would probably not be here. 
The find adds to the already strong evidence that an impact of an asteroid, at that time, caused worldwide climatic disruption and probably wiped-out the dinosaurs and many other species. 
Ten kilometres across may not sound very big, but it would have been travelling so fast that it would have slammed into the ground with overwhelming force - it would have distorted the very crust of the Earth. 
A few years ago, scientists identified the point of the impact.
It is a 300x180 km crater, now under the sea and covered with deposits off the Yucatan peninsula in the Gulf of Mexico. 
The first any creature would have known about it would have been a steadily brightening point of light in the sky. 
If it were ever to happen again there is only one thing to remember - if you can see it coming then
you are going to die, if you cannot you are probably dead anyway. 
Most of the asteroid would have been vaporised during impact. 
But landing in the ocean would not soften the blow.
Superheated steam would have been thrown into the atmosphere and tidal waves would have raced around the globe, repeatedly devastating seaboards. 
Molten rock from the sea floor would rain down on the land within thousands of miles of the impact.
A searing blast wave would race away from the impact point at thousands of miles an hour setting alight anything in its path. 
Dust from the impact and dust from the innumerable forest fires, not to mention exposed coal seams that would burn for millions of years afterwards, would accumulate in the atmosphere. 
The Sun's light would be cut off and the single most important chemical reaction on Earth would cease - no sunlight, no photosynthesis. 
Plants would die and food chains collapse - entire species would become extinct. 
Some calculations of the impact suggest that not all of the meteorite would have been vaporised.
Perhaps, if it came in at an oblique angle some would have survived.
There is some evidence for this as the Mexican crater is oval. 
Not every living thing perished after the impact.
Many plants did survive, as did crocodiles and turtles.
This puzzles scientists.
Also there is some evidence that the dinosaurs may have been declining before the impact. 
After the devastation had subsided, mammals, almost insignificant during the reign of the dinosaurs, were given the space to evolve into animals that eventually became us. 
You can read more about the fossil meteorite discovery in this week's Nature journal.
The research paper is authored by Frank T Kyte of the University of California, Los Angeles.
Astrophysicists have announced the first observations of so-called cosmological shear, an effect predicted by Einstein's theory of relativity. 
The discovery casts new light on the distribution of the "dark matter" which is thought to make up much of the Universe but which cannot be seen. 
"Pieces of the puzzle are falling into place," said Morris Aizenman of the US National Science Foundation's (NSF) Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences. 
"Within the first few months of this millennium, we have solved the riddle of the geometry of the Universe and are now on the threshold of exploring its structure." 
Unseen by telescopes, the nature and distribution of dark matter has puzzled astronomers for decades.
Now, using observations of an effect called weak gravitational lensing, scientists have been able to map the distribution of dark matter over large areas of the sky. 
Their results, already discussed at several conferences, are now published in the journal Nature. 
Gravitational lensing relies on Einstein's prediction in his general theory of relativity that gravity bends light.
The astronomers analysed the light from 145,000 very distant galaxies for evidence of distortions produced by the gravitational pull of dark matter that lay in their paths. 
To observers, the light from distant spherical objects is distorted by this gravitational pull into elliptical shapes, an effect known as cosmic shear. 
"The cosmic shear measures the structure of dark matter in the Universe in a way that no other observational measurement can," Anthony Tyson, another astronomer involved in the project said. 
"We now have a powerful tool to test the foundations of cosmology." 
The researchers were able to rule out a scenario known as the standard cold dark matter model, in which there is enough ordinary matter and dark matter in the Universe to eventually stop its expansion.
Hackers have exposed a security flaw which allows you to read other people's e-mails in Hotmail. 
Details of how to read other people's messages have been posted on a website run by a group called Root Core and it has quickly spread to other sites and newsgroups. 
"This is a serious vulnerability with Hotmail," said Graham Cluley, senior technology consultant at the anti-virus firm Sophos. 
But the process is cumbersome and involves some guesswork, limiting the threat to privacy. 
"The good news is that the average person in the street doesn't need to worry, as they would have to be specifically targeted," said Mr Cluley. 
"But if you're feeling paranoid, get your messages offline," he added. 
Hotmail is one of the world's most popular web-based e-mail services, with Microsoft saying it has more than 110 million active accounts. 
"Hotmail has been notified so it might not work for much longer but it works as of right now," says a message on the hackers' website. 
The flaw only allows you to read specific messages.
You cannot get access to the inbox or other parts of the e-mail account and you first need to log in to Hotmail using your own account. 
"There is the potential for some serious damage," said Craig Whitney, sales manager for Europe and the Middle East at the Managed Security Services division of Internet Security Systems. 
The flaw exploits the way Hotmail organises messages.
Every e-mail has a consistent format and the same number of digits. 
To gain access to the e-mails, you need to know a person's username and guess the number of a message. 
To get round this long process, Root Core have devised a scanning programme that tries about one message number per second. 
Mr Whitney said various factors could limit the impact of the security flaw. 
He said you would need a fast internet connection to run the scanning programme and know how often someone looked at their Hotmail account. 
Additionally there would be a clear trail back to the original Hotmail account used to hack another person's e-mails. 
"It raises the question of e-mail as a secure way to communicate," said Mr Whitney, comparing it to sending a letter in a transparent envelope. 
Microsoft has taken the brunt of criticism for security flaws exposed over the internet. 
Hackers have targeted its server software, Windows operating system, Outlook e-mail program, Internet Explorer browser, instant messaging software and Hotmail. 
"The problem is that Hotmail is probably the most popular web-based e-mail service, so hackers are drawn to target it," said Mr Cluley. 
"It's not necessarily that Microsoft software has more holes, but that more people are targeting their software as there is more of it." 
Root Core describes itself as a group which focuses on "information sharing not causing havoc."
Forty-four captive-bred dormice were released into an English woodland on Thursday. 
It was yet another step in the rescue plan that aims to save one of the UK's rarest mammals from extinction. 
The animals, with their orange/yellow fur, large black eyes and furry tails, have been placed temporarily in wire mesh acclimatisation cages wrapped around the branches of trees, where they will be fed and monitored. 
After 10 days, openings will be made in the mesh, allowing the dormice to disperse into the woods to find their own food and make their nests. 
The precise location of the release in Cambridgeshire is being kept secret to ensure the animals are not disturbed. 
Hazel dormice ( Muscardinus avellanarius ) have been in steady decline for decades as hedgerows and woodland have been turned over to arable production.
Climate change and changes in coppicing practice may also have been factors. 
The creatures have vanished from at least seven counties where they were reported to be present a century ago. 
Even where they do survive, populations are said to be under severe pressure. 
One recent survey found that dormice had completely disappeared from 70% of the hedgerows where they lived as recently as 1983. 
Their threatened position means they now have priority status in the species recovery programme overseen by English Nature, the government's wildlife agency. 
Thursday's release had been organised by English Nature itself, Mammals Trust UK, Royal Holloway, the University of London and the Forest Enterprise, which is managing the woodlands where the dormice have been set free. 
Dr Tony Mitchell-Jones, mammal expert from English Nature, said: "The dormouse is a key indicator for ancient woodland.
If we can re-establish breeding colonies in suitable woodland, it will be great news for dormice, and a milestone for conservation." 
This point was echoed by Dr Valerie Keeble, chief executive of Mammals Trust UK.
She told the BBC: "They're very particular creatures.
Throughout the summer, they need lots of different plants to survive - as the plants come to fruit, they eat the fruit and the budding.
So if the countryside is suitable for dormice, it's suitable for lots of other species as well." 
The young animals being introduced into the Cambridgeshire wood have been raised in captivity by licensed members of the Dormouse Captive Breeders Group. 
Previous releases have shown the dormice can establish themselves in their new environment and even extend their range. 
Dormice are nocturnal.
Their favoured habitats are deciduous woodland and overgrown hedgerows. 
They like to run in the canopies of trees to search for food - pollen, fruits, insects and nuts. 
In summer, dormice make distinctive grapefruit-sized nests, from vegetation and particularly honeysuckle bark, in which to rear their young. 
In winter, they hibernate and if food has been particularly scarce, the animals are able to lower their body temperature and become torpid - this way they can save energy.
Astronomers have detected what could be a 17th moon orbiting Jupiter - the first discovery of a previously unknown satellite around the giant planet for more than 20 years. 
The scientists at the University of Arizona and the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory in Massachusetts say the possible new moon is just 5km across, making it the smallest moon found for any of the major planets in the Solar System. 
But the astronomers say confirmation will not be possible for several months because Jupiter and its moons are currently too near the Sun for accurate, follow-up observations to be made. 
If it is confirmed, the new moon will then be given a name.
At the moment it is known only as S/1999 J1. 
Astronomers first spied the new moon as part of the Spacewatch Project, while they were scanning the skies for comets and asteroids. 
One object they saw was treated as if it was an asteroid and designated as 1999 UX18. 
But the object was moving more like a comet than an asteroid, even though it did not really look like a comet, the astronomers said. 
Scientists at Arizona's Lunar and Planetary Laboratory and at the Smithsonian's Minor Planet Center did not fully realise that the object was a new Jovian moon until this month, when orbital calculations showed it was not an asteroid orbiting the Sun, but rather a previously unknown moon going around Jupiter. 
To date, the smallest known moon for Jupiter was the 10km-diameter Leda, discovered in 1974. 
Astronomers say the new satellite belongs to the subgroup of outer satellites that travel around Jupiter in irregular orbits, around an average distance of about 24 million km (15 million miles) from the planet and take some two years to do so. 
It is the Sun's gravitational influence that makes the orbits highly erratic.
These outer satellites also circle Jupiter in the opposite direction to the other Jovian moons and were probably captured long ago from orbits about the Sun. 
Observations to tie down the details of S/1999 J1 are just beginning again as Jupiter can now once more be seen in the morning sky after its conjunction with the Sun in May.
The best images ever taken of Saturn's mysterious moon Titan reveal a complex surface that may be home to icy landforms and frigid hydrocarbon seas.
They would be the only known open oceans in the Solar System, other than on Earth. 
Astronomers from the US Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and the University of California have captured the images using the world's largest telescope, the Keck reflector on Hawaii. 
Sharper than those obtained by the Hubble Space Telescope, the Keck images show dark regions that may be seas of liquid hydrocarbons as well as bright regions that may be ice-and-rock continents or highlands. 
Titan is 5,120 kilometres (3,200 miles) in diameter, larger than the planet Mercury and is the only body in the Solar System with a nitrogen-rich atmosphere like the Earth's.
Being 1,200 million kilometres (800 million miles) from the Sun, Titan is much colder than Earth, with a surface temperature of minus 180 degrees Celsius (-290 F). 
Scientists believe that Titan could be one of the most important objects for scientific scrutiny in the entire Solar System as it may contain some of the secrets of the beginning of life. 
The new observations confirm that Titan is chemically rich.
It contains many of the molecules that were on the Earth before life arose on our planet. 
When the Voyager spacecraft passed by in 1980, it saw only the orange-brown top of Titan's smoggy skies.
Now, using the Keck telescope, scientists can get a more detailed view. 
"With the tremendous power of the Keck Telescope we are able to map surface features 150 miles in size on a moon that is more than 1,200 million kilometres (800 million miles) from Earth.
I find this tremendously exciting to think about," said Claire Max of the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory. 
"These models give the first quantitative map of Titan's surface.
The bright region shaped somewhat like a rubber duck seems to be made of a mixture of rock and ice," astrophysicist Seran Gibbard added. 
A kidney-shaped region near the left edge of that image is made of an extremely dark material.
Scientists have long suggested that ethane smog could condense and rain onto Titan's surface as a black liquid. 
The dark material could be a sea of liquid methane, ethane or other hydrocarbons," Livermore's Bruce Macintosh said.
"It's one of the darkest things in the Solar System.
It could also be solid organic material." 
Either possibility is exciting to scientists.
If it is a sea, it represents the only such open body of liquid known beyond planet Earth. 
Using this information, it is possible to imagine standing on Titan's frozen surface. 
The ground beneath your feet would have the reddish colour that dominates everything around you.
As you look towards the horizon, you would see undulating hills of ice with dark red and yellow peaks and rivulets of ochre on their flanks. 
Looking down you could see how the Ethane sea has eroded the base of one hill and you could see the scars made by recent icefalls. 
It may even rain on Titan, but not rain as we know it.
Methane rain would fall more slowly and in bigger drops than on Earth.
They may lead to streams, rivers and oceans, with rolling waves larger and slower than on our own planet. 
The Cassini spacecraft is currently en route to Saturn.
When it reaches it in 2004, it will drop a probe into Titan's atmosphere that, with luck, will land on the moon's surface and send back pictures.
The internet's single most important software package contains holes that can be exploited by malicious hackers. 
Anyone exploiting these vulnerabilities could take control of net servers, redirect visitors and steal e-mail messages, web security experts say. 
Net server administrators using the at risk versions of the Berkeley Internet Name Domain (Bind) software have been urged to update their systems swiftly before they are attacked. 
The internet's 13 root servers were quietly updated earlier this month ahead of the general, public alert. 
The security warning about the Berkeley Internet Name Domain server, used by an estimated 90% of the networks that comprise the internet, was issued by the US Government-funded Computer Emergency Response Team (Cert). 
Bind is the net equivalent of directory enquiries, and is consulted by a computer when it converts a domain name, such as bbc.co.uk, into a numeric address that details where to find that site on the internet.
Typically, hundreds or thousands of computers on an individual network consult a couple of servers running Bind. 
Now, work by PGP Covert Labs has found that versions 4 and 8 of Bind contain vulnerabilities that could be exploited by malicious hackers and let them take over a server. 
Typically, when a computer on the net gets a message it does not understand, it responds by generating a routine error message.
But PGP Covert Labs found that the vulnerabilities mean that Bind will execute commands hidden in carefully-crafted bogus messages. 
Malicious hackers exploiting this could take over a net server, redirect queries to sites they controlled or re-route e-mail messages. 
Shawn Hernan, leader of the Cert team, said Bind was "arguably the internet's single most important software package" and added: "This is among the most serious vulnerabilities to affect the internet." 
Before they were quietly upgraded earlier this month, the internet's 13 root servers, that hold the master lists of which websites are where, were vulnerable to this type of attack. 
Cert is typically happy to issue warnings via the net but this latest vulnerability was so serious that it called a press conference and publicly urged web server administrators to act straight away to close the loophole.
Worried webmasters should upgrade to secure versions of Bind. 
Cert said that swift action was needed malicious hackers are known to watch vulnerability alerts - sometimes more closely than many web administrators. 
When Cert issued a warning about a hole in Bind in November 1999, the number of attempts by malicious hackers to exploit this vulnerability rose in the following couple of months.
It expects exploitation of the holes to be "widespread" very soon.
Japan says it could kill far more whales in the Antarctic than at present without risking their extinction. 
It says it could safely kill about four times more minke whales annually for a century. 
But extending the kill must wait for the end of the present global moratorium on commercial whaling.
Until it does end, Japan says, it has no plans to kill more whales. 
The claim that minke whales are abundant in the Antarctic came from the director general of the Tokyo-based Institute of Cetacean Research, Dr Seiji Ohsumi. 
He told BBC Radio Four's environment programme Costing the Earth: "Using the data we have acquired for the Southern Ocean minkes, our calculation is that a quota of 2,000 whales could be taken for a 100 years without impact on the population." 
Minkes, the smallest of the great whales, can reach 10 metres (32 feet) in length in maturity.
There are thought to be up to 750,000 in the Antarctic. 
But the International Whaling Commission, the body responsible both for whale conservation and for regulating whaling, has recently said it does not know how many minkes there are. 
Japan kills about 500 minkes a year, most of them in the Antarctic, but some also in the North Pacific, where it has begun catching small numbers of sperm and Bryde's whales as well. 
It says they too are abundant, and it is researching their stomach contents to see whether they are eating commercially important quantities of fish. 
Japan says all its whaling is scientific research, which the IWC allows. 
Japan's critics say it is simply a stratagem to keep the whaling fleet occupied until the IWC agrees to end the moratorium.
The country defends its Antarctic programme as necessary to establish the minkes' abundance. 
Many critics also allege that Japan misuses its aid budget to bribe smaller IWC members to vote its way at Commission meetings. 
An independent member of parliament, Hiroshi Nakada, told Costing the Earth: "So many countries receive foreign aid money, including anti-whaling nations.
But nobody minds Japan giving money to them. 
"Oman, Argentina and India receive money from us, and they're always going against our cause.
But no-one questions them.
We don't ask anyone to vote on our side.
They do it voluntarily." 
A senior official of the country's Fisheries Agency, Joji Morishita, told the programme that Japanese people felt much of the criticism was racist. 
He said: "We're trying to protect the principle of the sustainable utilisation of any animal, but whales are treated as an exception. 
"If you say whaling is cruel you should compare it with the hunting of deer, which is accepted. 
"Singling out whaling is cultural imperialism - some people would say it's racism.
Norway and Iceland are also whalers, but the criticism of Japan is stronger." 
Only a third of Japanese people have ever eaten whale meat, and the programme heard from one man who said increasing numbers now preferred beef instead. 
Costing the Earth is broadcast on BBC Radio 4 at 2000 GMT, on Thursday, 4 October, presented by Alex Kirby.
World governments are coming under renewed pressure to lift an international ban on whaling. 
Japan, Norway and Iceland
will this week urge members of the International Whaling Commission (IWC) to end a moratorium on the killing of whales. 
But the UK, Australia and America support the international ban on commercial whaling, which has been in force since 1986. 
Environmental groups have even accused Japan of bribing poorer countries to vote with them. 
They claim several Caribbean nations have accepted financial aid in return for supporting Japan at Commission meetings. 
Animal rights groups are to hold a protest outside the London venue of the week-long meeting, fearing the ban could be overturned. 
The moratorium's supporters are essentially fighting a rearguard action to keep it intact.
In the 15 years since the prohibition came into force, thousands of whales have been killed. 
rules allow unlimited catches of any species in the name of scientific research, and Japan has been hunting the relatively abundant minke whales in the Antarctic for some years. 
A Japanese delegate to the talks was criticised by conservationists after he described minke whales as "cockroaches of the seas", adding that "there are too many of them". 
Japan has recently extended the hunt to take small numbers of minkes, sperm and Bryde's whales, which are much less numerous, in the north Pacific. 
The environmental pressure group Greenpeace says Japan has secured support for lifting the ban by bribing a number of countries, including six east Caribbean states, the Solomon Islands and Guinea. 
Norway is not bound by the moratorium because it objected to it in the first place. 
It kills around 500 minkes in the north Atlantic every year.
There is also some limited whaling by local communities in the Arctic and the Caribbean, again permitted by the IWC. 
And Iceland, which left the Commission in 1993, has this year rejoined it.
It says it will resume whaling, possibly as early as next year. 
In a report released to coincide with the meeting, the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) says Japan, Norway and Iceland have all generated sizeable incomes from a growing whale-watching industry. 
The study claims the activity is now worth ?
710m worldwide. 
Japans' IFAW spokesman Inaoko Funahashi said: "No doubt whale-watchers in Japan, Norway and Iceland are wondering why their governments want to kill this precious resource.
We think whales should be seen and not hurt." 
The IWC was set up more than 50 years ago, charged with conserving both whales and whaling.
Twenty years ago, a clear majority of members favoured a purely conservationist role for the commission. 
They argued that the depredations of the commercial whaling years meant the world's severely depleted populations should be left in peace, in the hope that they might recover. 
Some appear to have begun to do so: the minkes and the gray whales are doing comparatively well. 
But there is hardly any sign of growth in the numbers of blue whales, the largest creatures ever to have lived on Earth. 
Estimated at more than 250,000 in their prime, the blue whales are now thought to number perhaps as few as 5,000.
Very rich Speaks English Good health The nine-page report was released as the world's second space tourist, South African internet millionaire Mark Shuttleworth, completed a week of training at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. 
In the past, Nasa has resisted the idea of space tourism.
It strongly opposed the trip made by the world's first space tourist, Dennis Tito, in April 2001. 
But in December last year, the agency made a dramatic U-turn and gave its approval to Mr Shuttleworth's flight. 
When Mr Tito visited the Johnson Space Center two years ago, he was banned from joining his Russian crewmates in training. 
But now Nasa's top space station official, Michael Hawes, has acknowledged that Mr Tito's flight helped form the basis for the new criteria for deciding who could and could not go. 
Under the new criteria, which took two years to prepare, having an enormous amount of money will not be enough to ensure entry to the ISS. 
Candidates can be disqualified for numerous offences, including delinquency and criminal, dishonest, disgraceful or infamous conduct. 
Habitual drug users or those who indulge in excessive drinking will also fail to make the grade. 
As will those who have held membership or sponsorship in organisations which could damage the public's confidence in the space station or any of the space agencies involved. 
According to Charles Precourt, Nasa's chief astronaut, who helped create the list, said each candidate would be assessed on a case-by-case basis and a person's age at the time of the offence and the surrounding circumstances would be taken into account. 
The list will be followed by the space agencies of the United States, Russia, Canada, Japan and Europe. 
"We want to ensure when we nominate someone, that we don't embarrass our partners by having someone who would be so controversial that it would be an insult to the other partners to fly them," Mr Precourt said. 
According to Mr Precourt, the evaluation is similar to that used by the US Government in background investigations for positions requiring security clearance. 
Future space tourists must also be able to read and speak English, pass medical tests and will be required to undergo training both in Moscow and Houston and follow a code of conduct. 
Nasa is keen to stress though that the publication of the list does not mean that it is about to start flying tourists into space itself. 
Mr Shuttleworth, who is reported to have paid as much as $20m for his flight, will have to travel to the ISS in a Russian Soyuz capsule. 
He had been scheduled to take off on 22 April, but now that launch has been pushed back to 27 April because of technical problems.
Oops, the Universe is not turquoise - it is off-white.
Researchers who tried to gauge what the eye might see if it were tuned to all the light coming from thousands of galaxies have admitted to a mistake with the software they used to make the calculation.
They say the software was set up wrongly, making the Universe more colourful than it really is.
"It's much closer to white, really," said Ivan Baldry, a post-doctoral fellow at Johns Hopkins University, US.
"More like cream."
Dr Baldry made the turquoise announcement in January with Dr Karl Glazebrook.
The Hopkins scientists said they were alerted to the error by colour engineers who checked the software.
"It is embarrassing," said Dr Glazebrook.
"But this is science.
We're not like politicians.
If we make mistakes, we admit them.
That's how science works."
The pair determined the cosmic colour by combining light from over 200,000 galaxies within two billion light-years of Earth.
The data had come from the Australian 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey at the Anglo-Australian Observatory in New South Wales, Australia.
By giving a numeric value to the colours of the different galaxies, adding them together and then averaging them, they came up with their colour, which they dubbed cosmic spectrum green.
The activity was supposed to be an amusing footnote to a serious astronomical paper, but the media liked it and ran the story with big headlines.
Then, the Munsell Color Science Laboratories at the Rochester Institute of Technology in New York, US, contacted the researchers to tell them they had incorrectly set a feature known as the "white point".
The white point is the point at which light appears white to the human eye in different kinds of illumination.
The Hopkins astronomers' white point was redder than it should have been, and this skewed their result.
Munsell Color Science Laboratories is now working with Drs Baldry and Glazebrook to produce more impressions of the colour of the Universe.
"The mistake took some time to realise and track down," the team said on its website.
"Only a handful of colour scientists had the expertise to spot the error.
One moral of this story is we should have paid more attention to the 'colour science' aspect and had that refereed as well."
The website updates the researchers' earlier findings.
It shows a patch of colour that to the casual observer will seem, well, white.
"Good luck if you can see the difference between this colour and white!" they write. "
Suggestions for the name are welcome.
As long as it is not beige!"
The serious research the two men were doing?
It was about using the light from stars of different ages to try to work out how the rate of star-birth might have changed over time.
Scientists have found DNA from genetically modified crops in wild maize growing on remote mountains in Mexico. 
The authors of the study say they found the results hard to believe, but saw them verified by a Mexican Government follow up. 
Now, they are worried that genes from GM crops are unintentionally threatening the valuable diversity of native wild maize. 
The wild maize in question was growing around 100 kilometres (62 miles) from the nearest industrially farmed crops. 
Mexico has had a moratorium on new plantings of GM maize since 1998 but allows the import of GM crops for consumption. 
Ignacio Chapela and David Quist of the University of California, Berkeley, US, compared wild maize from the Sierra Norte de Oaxaca mountains in Mexico with GM varieties from the Monsanto company in the US and with samples known to be uncontaminated. 
They found that some of the wild samples were contaminated with telltale sections of DNA from GM crops. 
"This is very serious because the regions where our samples were taken are known for their diverse varieties of native corn, which is something that absolutely needs to be protected," Dr Chapela said. 
"Originally I was very surprised and concerned about the danger of false positives.
I was very alarmed and hoping it wasn't true," his colleague David Quist told BBC News Online. 
"It was initially hard to believe that corn in such a remote region would have tested positive," he said, explaining that tests were carried out in two labs in Mexico and one in the US. 
It is not entirely clear how the DNA from the GM crops got into the wild plants, but David Quist has a theory. 
"It's more likely that the contamination came from food aid brought in to these regions.
A lot of it comes from the United States and a lot of it is transgenic," he said. 
Mr Quist believes measures should be taken to counter the spread of GM genes.
"Once the DNA is in the population, you can't just go and fish it out," he said. 
But a well-enforced ban on imported GM corn and a programme to encourage traditional habits of swapping and testing wild seeds would dilute the influence of the GM genes, he said. 
The publication of the study coincides with the issue of a report by a UK coalition calling for further restrictions on GM crops. 
"The issue... has amounted to a public relations disaster for a government whose support for the agri-biotechnology industry has been seen to clash with its responsibility to the public interest," the Five Year Freeze campaign said on Wednesday. 
The campaign, which encompasses a range of pressure groups and companies, wants to see a five-year ban on the planting, import and patenting of GM crops. 
"Today's report in Nature shows evidence of GM contamination of wild maize in Mexico, the origin of all maize varieties, posing a potential threat to vital diversity essential for future global food security," said the campaign's coordinator, Clare Devereux. 
"Here in the UK the issue of genetic pollution not only threatens biodiversity, but also the livelihoods of non-GM and organic farmers, and the right of consumers to choose GM-free food," she said. 
Guy Poppy of CropGen, an association backed by the UK biotech industry, described the study as "a good piece of research" but said it contained no real surprises. 
"It's better to acknowledge that a minimum of cross-pollination cannot be avoided and not to panic: after all, nowhere in the world has a GM product been found to be unhealthy and no adverse environmental effect has ever been substantiated," he said. 
Further studies were required to evaluate the impact of genetic transfers, he said, adding: "Let's not forget that the benefit from GM is already being felt around the world. 
"In Mexico, they've used GM technology to address the problem of high levels of aluminium in the soil, which in the developing world reduces yields by as much as 80%. "
By transferring a gene from a bacterium called Pseudomonas into maize, the crop can be made resistant to this toxic metal." 
The Mexican maize study appears in the journal Nature.
New delays to the launch of Japan's first H-IIA rocket, made worse by the arrival of Typhoon Pabuk, are the latest in a series of headaches for its National Space Development Agency (Nasda). 
Nasda was set up in 1969 and launched Japan's first totally self-developed rocket, the H-II, in 1994. 
But the H-II programme was cancelled in 1999 after the first-stage engine of the rocket cut out too early and the rocket was deliberately destroyed along with its $83m (?57m) satellite payload. 
Six other H-IIs were launched and both the second and sixth launch missions had problems inserting their satellite payloads into correct orbits. 
Experience gained on the H-II programme has been incorporated into the H-IIA, intended as a competitor to Europe's Ariane system. 
The first H-IIA was due to fly in February 2001, but there were problems with the rocket's pipes and plating, and the launch was rescheduled for August. 
Now, problems with a valve in one of the rocket's engines mean it will not lift off before 28 August. 
Replacement parts are already at Nasda's Tanegashima Space Centre, but the arrival of Typhoon Pabuk means aircraft flights are being cancelled and a full investigation of the problem is being held up. 
Nasda is optimistic about the H-IIA's future, despite the cancellation in 2000 by Hughes Space and Communications International of a $710m (?489m) order for 10 H-IIAs. 
The H-IIA is designed specifically for commercial launches and costs half as much as its predecessor. 
It can put a four-tonne payload into orbit, and Nasda hopes that this will be extended to a 7.5 tonne capacity within two years. 
The 53-metre high rocket is built using 20% fewer parts than its predecessor, which makes it cheaper, and, with luck, less likely to go wrong. 
Nasda is well aware of the pressure it faces. 
"We're definitely feeling the heat," Nasda spokesman Keiichi Yamata told Reuters news agency. 
"There is a social environment right now that won't permit any more mistakes." 
Japanese newspapers are reporting that Nasda may face steep budget cuts as part of a drive to cut public spending. 
But Mr Yamata says that Nasda is keeping its mind on the H-IIA mission. 
"We can't think about budget cuts...
We just have to have a successful launch," he said.
The long-term future of the UK's Jodrell Bank Observatory is secure after the money was found to upgrade and run its Merlin network of radio telescopes. 
The Cheshire observatory, which is best known for its giant Lovell dish, has come through an uncertain few months with physics authorities in Britain arguing over how best to fund the country's competing astronomical interests. 
Next year, the UK will join the European Southern Observatory (ESO) project in Chile with its world-class array of optical telescopes - but this is expensive, and the costs of membership have led to a reappraisal of other commitments.
A question mark was even put against Jodrell. 
But the Lovell dish will now continue to sweep the skies for many years to come, thanks to an announcement on Wednesday from Pparc, the Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council. 
The body, which runs most of the UK's astronomy effort, has determined that the work done at Jodrell should be enhanced.
This means the observatory's Merlin (Multi-Element-Radio-Linked-Interferometer) network of telescopes will be upgraded. 
Jodrell had already found the capital costs of the upgrade; it needed the Pparc endorsement to get the running costs. 
The upgraded network will be known as e-Merlin.
The current seven-dish 217-km-long (134 miles) array of radio antennae, stretching from Cheshire to Cambridgeshire, will be improved with optical fibre connections. 
This will allow a far greater proportion of the radio waves actually collected by the individual antennae to be brought back to Jodrell Bank, whose Lovell dish is currently ungoing a major refit of its own. 
Dr Philip Diamond, Merlin's director, said: "In combination with the newly resurfaced 76-metre Lovell telescope, the upgrade will give a 30-fold increase in sensitivity. 
"This will enable the enhanced instrument, called e-Merlin, to probe far deeper into the Universe, achieving in one day what would currently take three years of continuous observation." 
Merlin is the UK's national radio-imaging facility and the only world-class astronomical facility based solely in the UK. 
Radio astronomy is crucial to the understanding of our Universe because radio waves penetrate the clouds of dust and gas that hamper observations at other frequencies. 
But what gives? 
e-Merlin will have unprecedented sensitivity and an imaging capability equivalent to viewing a one-penny piece at a distance of 80 kilometres (50 miles). 
Radio astronomers have known for a number of years that by linking together an array of telescopes they can mimic the power of a single, very much larger device. 
This approach, known as interferometry, is now being applied to optical telescopes like the Very Large Telescope (VLT) array being installed in Chile by the European Southern Observatory. 
The ESO facility promises to push astronomy forward on another giant leap of discovery when it becomes fully operational in a couple of years. 
astronomers are very keen to be part of the venture and will have to give up other cherished projects to pay for access - especially now that the Merlin upgrade has been agreed. 
This point was underlined by Professor Ian Halliday, the chief executive of Pparc. 
He said: "Joining ESO requires that Pparc make savings from its current ground-based programme in order to supplement the significant contribution we received from government at the last spending review. 
"We plan to achieve these savings by restructuring the current ground-based astronomy programme.
With a limited budget, there will be inevitable reductions to certain facilities within the existing programme.
" 
astronomy is waiting to see which projects now get dumped. 
Nevertheless, Sir Martin Rees, the Astronomer Royal, was upbeat about Tuesday's announcement: "Joining ESO is good for UK science, and I think good for Europe as well.
It offers us access to the VLT's 8-m class telescopes and restores the UK's full competitiveness in optical astronomy." 
Sir Martin added: "The upgrade to Merlin will ensure our own national facility, centred around the Lovell telescope in the North West, will continue to deliver world class science."
Most large businesses and government agencies in the US have been the victim of computer crime which has cost them millions of dollars, researchers say.
A survey by the Computer Security Institute and the Federal Bureau of Investigation found that 85% of respondents had detected security breaches of their computer systems last year.
While most organisations were reluctant to put a figure on their financial loses, a third said security breaches in 2001 had cost them $377m, compared to $265m in 2000.
"The results of this year's survey again demonstrate the seriousness and complexity of computer crime," said Bruce Gebhardt, director of the FBI's Northern California office.
For the survey, the Computer Security Institute interviewed 538 computer security experts in business, government agencies, medical institutions and universities.
As in previous years, the most serious financial losses occurred through theft of proprietary information.
"Theft of trade secrets takes place despite the presence of encryption," said Patrice Rapalus, director of the Computer Security Institute.
Virtually all the organisations had been attacked by computer viruses last year.
But one of the most common forms of attack was one of the least damaging.
Some 90% of organisations said they had been victims of website defacements in 2001, a rise from 64% in the previous year.
Another common breach was employees abusing their internet privileges, such as downloading pornography or pirated software.
"Net abuse flourishes despite corporate edicts against it," said Patrice Rapalus.
He urged companies and the government to take a more aggressive and coordinated approach to fighting computer crime.
"Organisations that want to survive in the coming years need to develop a comprehensive approach to information security, embracing both the human and technical dimensions," he said.
"They also need to properly fund, train, staff and empower those tasked with enterprise-wide information security."
The US Department of Justice is working with Congress to toughen existing cybercrime legislation.
In response to the growing threat from cybercriminals, the FBI has set up the National Infrastructure Protection Center and regional Computer Intrusion Squads have been created in several offices throughout the US.
The American space agency (Nasa) says the space shuttle Columbia can complete its 11-day mission to the Hubble Space Telescope despite a technical hitch that had threatened to end the flight.
Shuttle programme manager Ron Dittemore said a review had concluded that the problem in the craft's cooling system was stable and there was no reason to believe it posed a threat to the shuttle or its seven crew.
"The team decided we could press on with the nominal mission and not make any changes," he said.
Columbia's blasted off on Friday for an 11-day mission to carry out repairs and improvements to Hubble.
But ground controllers soon detected a blockage in the coolant line which removed heat from the shuttle's electronics system.
It is believed the blockage may be debris from a welding job carried out during Columbia's recent overhaul.
Records show a welding error happened during the overhaul, but the line was cleaned, inspected and re-certified, said Kari Fluegel, a spokeswoman for private contractor United Space Alliance.
Although the reduced flow in the line posed no immediate problem, flight rules insist that the shuttle has two working coolant loops.
Optimism had been growing throughout Saturday that the mission would remain on track.
Mission director Phil Engelauf said engineers were confident that the system would still handle the increased heat load during landing, although some systems may have to be closed down.
The final decision came on Saturday as the astronauts slept.
It means all systems are go for the shuttle's rendezvous with Hubble at 0915 GMT on Sunday and five days of spacewalks to improve the telescope's electrical and scientific output.
Even before the decision, Columbia's commander, Scott Altman, said that he and his crew were "charging ahead full speed with our eyes on the goal", despite the debate taking place at mission control.
"To be honest, we have gone on the assumption that we are here to stay, that we are going to do our job, and we have just kept that thought foremost in our minds," he said.
Astronaut John Grunsfeld added: "We're letting the smart folks on the ground really worry for us."
Mr Dittemore said if there were any signs of the coolant blockage worsening, he and his team would reassess the situation.
The 12-year-old orbiting Hubble observatory has taken some astonishing pictures of deep space and is expected to do even better after its upgrade.
The Columbia crew must fit Hubble with a new camera, solar wings, power-control unit, steering mechanism and a refrigerator system that should allow scientists to use an infrared camera.
The most daunting part of the mission will be to fit the new power unit.
Astronauts will have to switch the telescope off and Nasa cannot guarantee that it will be able to switch the observatory back on again.
Fourteen years after the world banned whaling, the signs are that the moratorium will be lifted within the next year or two. 
The ending of the ban, imposed in 1986, may not necessarily mean a big increase in the number of whales being killed. 
But it will send shockwaves through the green movement, which sees the ending of commercial whaling as one of its crowning achievements. 
And it will throw wide open the debate about sustainable use, the argument that humans can, within limits, exploit every species. 
The secretary of the International Whaling Commission (IWC), Dr Ray Gambell, told BBC News Online that a failure to signal the forthcoming end of the ban would mean "a real danger that the commission will lose its credibility totally". 
The ban on commercial whaling was agreed by the IWC in 1982, and finally implemented four years later.
But two IWC members continue to kill whales - Japan for what it calls "scientific research", and Norway because it does not accept the moratorium. 
Under IWC rules both are legally entitled to their catches, though most members disapprove strongly. 
In 1999 Japan killed more than 500 minke whales in the Antarctic and north Pacific, and Norway plans to catch 655 north Atlantic minkes this year.
Adult minkes, the smallest of the great whales, measure about 10 metres. 
There are thought to be at least 750,000 in the Antarctic, and 80,000 off the Norwegian coast. 
Japan is extending its research programme to kill two larger species, sperm and Bryde's whales, as well as minkes. 
The IWC will hold its 2000 meeting in Adelaide, South Australia, in July.
For years now, IWC meetings have been little more than ritual confrontations between the anti-whaling majority and the pro-whalers, Japan, Norway and their few allies. 
But Adelaide looks likely to be very different, with the whalers being offered the prospect that their activities will soon have the commission's approval. 
Dr Gambell, a British whale biologist, has been secretary of the IWC, which is based in Cambridge, UK, since 1976.
He will retire after the Adelaide meeting. 
Stressing that an end to the ban was only a possibility, he told BBC News Online: "Whaling is going on at a commercial level.
It's outside IWC control. 
"I would think it much better that it was brought within international regulations and oversight. 
"I think the commission will need to move forward on measures which would allow controlled whaling, otherwise it will lose credibility. 
Dr Gambell accepted that many people would be aghast at the prospect of the IWC sanctioning renewed commercial whaling. 
"Some people think whales are such special animals that they shouldn't be hunted at all.
But that's very much a question of different cultures. 
"There have been major advances in recent years in the killing technology.
The time to death is very much improved, though there is still room for further improvement. 
"There is not going to be, I think, a major expansion in whaling across the world's oceans.
Commercial whaling is going to be a small-scale local activity, largely confined to coastal areas.
" 
Dr Gambell also believes a resumption of trade in whalemeat and products is possible, relying on state-of-the-art DNA technology to determine the origin of every import.
And he thinks the IWC must face up to the challenge of sustainable use. 
"We have to look to managing the world in a proper way, because the number of people is going to continue to grow, there are going to be increasing pressures on living space and food availability. 
"The whale is a high-profile animal.
It has become a symbol."
Tyson Foods Inc. allegedly depressed workers wages by hiring immigrants known to be illegal, according to a lawsuit filed by four former employees.
The company and six former managers already face a federal indictment accusing them of conspiring to smuggle illegal immigrants to work at 15 plants.
The civil lawsuit, filed Tuesday by former hourly employees of Tyson s Shelbyville plant, accuses the meat company of relying on temporary employment services and on recruiters it says were paid for each illegal immigrant the company hired.
Non-Tyson workers in the same communities as the 15 plants received much higher wages, according to the lawsuit.
The lawsuit seeks class-action status.
"The civil action is going to compensate the innocents who have been devastated by the illegal hiring scheme," said John McMahan, a Chattanooga attorney representing one of the plaintiffs.
"It s the only way to hold Tyson accountable."
Tyson spokesman Ed Nicholson declined comment on the lawsuit.
Tyson, based in Springdale, Ark., is the nation s largest meat company, with 120,000 employees.
Executives contend the government s case involves a "few managers who were acting outside of company policy."
One executive said the indictment followed the company s refusal to pay the government a $100 million penalty.
The indictment involves plants in Alabama, Indiana, Kentucky, Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina , Tennessee, Texas and Virginia.
Scientists are haggling over an ancient chunk of rock that contains either imperfections or 3,500 million-year-old fossils of bacteria -- evidence of the oldest form of life on Earth.
The debate delves into the origin of life, when and how it started and if it could exist in similar forms on other planets.
William Schopf, a scientist at the University of California in Los Angeles , discovered what is thought to be the oldest example of life in ancient rock formations in Western Australia in 1993.
The fossils of bacteria are 1,300 million years older than other specimens of early life.
According to Schopf, the shape and look of the specimen, which was all they had to go on at the time, indicated they were bacteria and showed life evolved more quickly than previously thought -- less than a billion years after the Earth was formed.
It also suggested life was a consequence of planet formation and could exist elsewhere in the solar system.
In a letter to the journal Nature on Wednesday, Schopf and his colleagues said an analysis of the fossils with a new laser technique supported their earlier conclusions.
An analysis of their chemical composition also showed the fossils contain carbon, proving that they once lived.
The results obtained substantiate the biological origin of the earliest cellular fossils known, Schopf said in the journal.
But in a separate letter to Nature, Martin Brasier of Oxford University in England and other scientists challenged Schopf s findings, saying the shapes of the fossils bear no resemblance to bacteria and they are more likely blobs of mineral graphite imbedded in the rock.
If Brasier is correct, Nature s deputy editor Henry Gee said it could have a major impact on Schopf s discovery and many other fossils that have been discovered in other ancient rock formations during the past decade.
What Brasier is doing is calling all of these (findings) into question, Gee said in an interview.
It is not a yes or no answer.
There could be some that are blobs and some that are fossils and it is going to very hard, if not impossible, given current technology to tell the difference.
Schopf s conclusions suggest that complex life could have formed extraordinarily quickly after the formation of the planet.
This new work calls a lot of that into doubt and could wipe out the first billion years of evidence of life on Earth, Gee added.
Have a comment on this article?
Send it.
A new vaccine that is perhaps the most closely watched experiment in all of AIDS research is showing promise in early human testing, but researchers caution they are still years away from proving it works.
The approach, called prime-boost, is highly effective in monkeys.
Until now, scientists were unsure whether the same would be true in people.
Results released Tuesday at the 9th Annual Retrovirus Conference in Seattle suggest the immune system response in people is identical to that in newly vaccinated monkeys, which are able to withstand exposure to the virus.
Experts believe a vaccine is the only way to stop the worldwide AIDS epidemic, which has already killed 20 million people and infected 40 million more.
But the search has been frustrating, because the virus has evolved elaborate and effective strategies to elude the body s usual defenses against microbes.
Volunteers in the early-stage testing of Merck Co s experimental vaccine have not been put to the crucial challenge of exposure to HIV, and proving the vaccine does its job will require testing on large numbers of people who are at risk of catching it through sex or drug abuse.
Nevertheless, researchers said the new results are promising, because they raise the possibility that a vaccine can arm the body s immune defenses to fight off HIV and prevent AIDS.
"We are encouraged," said Emini, head of Merck s AIDS vaccine program.
"Obviously, the big question is how effective this will be in preventing or mitigating infection.
That will have to wait until we get into long-term studies."
Several new vaccines, like Merck s, take a two-step approach.
The first, called the prime, is typically HIV genes that are injected into muscle where they are taken up by cells and result in production of viral proteins.
The second is the boost, often a harmless hollowed-out virus that carries in more HIV genes.
Together, if all goes as planned, they induce the body to vigorously kill HIV-infected cells.
This may not prevent an infection, but it should minimize its consequences by keeping virus levels low.
The Merck study is "an important piece of the puzzle.
The early data are encouraging and appear to be more encouraging than other types of vaccines that are in later phases of trials," said Dr. Wayne Koff, research chief at the International AIDS Vaccine Initiative.
His organization is sponsoring a similar study in Africa, conducted by researchers from the University of Oxford.
However, those results have not been released, so Tuesday s report by Merck is the first to suggest that the approach may work in people.
Two other vaccines are in later stages of development, but many researchers like Koff are less enthusiastic about them.
One, VaxGen s AIDSVax vaccine, has already been given to 7,900 volunteers in America, Europe and Thailand.
It is a more traditional vaccine, made from the outer shell of the AIDS virus.
Results are expected later this year.
On Monday, the National Institutes of Health abandoned plans for a large U.S. study of another two-step vaccine approach - Aventis Pasteur s genetically engineered canarypox followed by AIDSVax - but said it will still go ahead with a similar study of the combination in Thailand.
If all goes perfectly, Emini said it will be at least five years and probably longer before the Merck vaccine reaches general use.
"I would say full speed ahead for this particular research program.
These are very encouraging results," said Dr. David Ho, scientific director of the Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center in New York City .
The Merck researchers plan to try the vaccine on about 600 volunteers in the first-stage tests.
About 100 people were given injections of the prime, an HIV gene called gag.
As expected, the response was modest.
About one-third of them showed an immune reaction.
The team is testing escalating doses of the boost stage, which consists of a disabled cold virus crafted to hold another copy of HIV s gag gene.
Since virtually everyone has been exposed to ordinary varieties of this microbe, known as an adenovirus, the scientists worry the vaccine will be destroyed immediately by the immune system.
However, the new data suggest that when large doses are given, at least some of the vaccine survives to produce an immune reaction that could - if all works as planned - prepare the body to fight off AIDS.
S NOTE:
Medical Editor Daniel Q. Haney is a special correspondent for The Associated Press.
Copyright 2002
Associated Press.
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
Have a comment on this article?
Send it.
After a four-year hiatus, the Grammy Awards will return to New York next year for the 45th annual ceremony - and it was a simple phone call from new Mayor Michael Bloomberg that sealed the deal.
"Only a couple of days after he was elected, the mayor called me up in the most humble tones," said Michael Greene, head of the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, in announcing the Grammys return to Madison Square Garden.
"We talked about the importance of bringing the Grammys back to New York," Greene said Wednesday. "
To New York - you ve got a great new mayor."
The smiles were in contrast with the animosity between Greene and ex-mayor Rudolph Giuliani , who had accused the academy chief of unleashing a stream of obscenities at a mayoral staffer back in 1998.
Greene denied the allegation; Giuliani called him a liar.
When the Grammys moved back to Los Angeles the next year, Greene said the Giuliani dust-up was not a factor.
But the Grammys stayed in California for the duration of the Giuliani administration.
Bloomberg deflected suggestions that his approach - conciliatory rather than combative - had lured the Grammys back.
The Grammys return said nothing about the two mayors differing styles, Bloomberg insisted.
"No matter who s mayor, the Grammys should come to New York," Bloomberg said.
"The Grammys belong here because this is the musical center of the world."
Giuliani, through a spokeswoman, declined comment.
Greene - who arrived for the news conference at The Theater at Madison Square Garden in a yellow taxi - was effusive Wednesday in his praise of the ex-mayor.
"The way that Rudy Giuliani handled the last year of his mayoral term was brilliant," Greene said.
"We re very, very thankful to the mayor for the things he did."
The 2003 show, the ninth time the Grammys will have come to New York, will be held Feb. 23.
It will be the first time the Grammys are broadcast on a Sunday night.
The annual show generates an estimated $40 million for the local economy.
U.S. Sen. Chuck Schumer, also attending the news conference, said the return of the Grammys was particularly significant while New York rebounds from the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks that killed nearly 3,000 people at the World Trade Center .
"New York always wants the Grammys," Schumer said.
"But this year New York needs the Grammys."
Grammy-winning singer Marc Anthony , a native New Yorker , joined Sony Music head Tommy Mottola in presenting Bloomberg with an autographed guitar from Les Paul s personal collection.
The guitar, which features a Sept. 11 scene painted on it by a retired city firefighter, will be auctioned, and the proceeds donated to a fund benefitting widows and orphans of the trade center rescue workers.
Greene has said he would like to alternate the show between New York and Los Angeles.
A pair of astronauts from space shuttle Columbia performed the first of five ambitious spacewalks dedicated to improving the Hubble Space Telescope on Monday, hanging a new solar-power array on the orbiting observatory.
reported that the first of the two new wing-like structures to be added on this mission had passed an aliveness test, and television pictures beamed down from space showed the array in motion, a necessary feature to track the sun while Hubble speeds around Earth.
Astronauts John Grunsfeld and Rick Linnehan donned bulky spacesuits and left Columbia s airlock during a pass over the Sahara Desert some 350 miles below.
Hello, Mr. Hubble, the telescope.
We re here to give you more power, said Grunsfeld, an astronomer and self-described Hubble hugger making his second service call on the venerable telescope.
He made two spacewalks on a 1999 Hubble mission.
With rare whimsy, Mission Control awoke the astronauts hours earlier by playing Mozart s Variations on Twinkle,
Twinkle Little Star.
Grunsfeld said when Columbia s crew was finished with modifications designed to improve Hubble s performance tenfold, I think the stars will twinkle a little more for everyone.
Linnehan, making his first spacewalk, will make two more with Grunsfeld before the end of the mission.
Linnehan spent most of the first seven-hour spacewalk riding one end of the shuttle s 50-foot robotic arm, which was operated from inside Columbia by astronaut Nancy Currie.
The four-story Hubble was secured to Columbia s cargo bay after it was plucked from orbit on Sunday.
On Tuesday, another team of astronauts will add the second of the thin, flexible, 40-foot solar arrays, which were rolled up like scrolls to make them easier to maneuver once detached.
The spacewalkers made quick work of removing the array, but fell behind when they struggled to close a cargo-carrier that will return the old arrays to Earth.
The new arrays are smaller, each just 25 feet long, but they will deliver 20 percent to 30 percent more power making it possible for Hubble to use all its scientific instruments at once.
reported a problem with Grunsfeld s spacesuit, which did not send back data on oxygen, battery power and some 25 other readings throughout the spacewalk.
As a result, he had to periodically call out readings to Mission Control, where Dana Weigel, lead spacewalk officer, said they hoped to later reset the circuitry.
No impact on the mission was expected even if the problem continued.
Hubble is 12 years into a 20-year mission and has established itself as one of history s finest scientific instruments, having proven the existence of super-massive black holes, witnessed the formative stages of solar systems and charted the age of the universe.
Scientists are particularly excited because the upgrades on this mission should leave the telescope 10 times as powerful.
But that extra power does not come without risk.
On Wednesday, NASA will have to turn off Hubble s power for the first time in orbit, something never anticipated.
There is no guarantee the power will come back on, though NASA said it was confident it would.
Columbia launched from the Kennedy Space Center on Friday and is to land there March 12.
Have a comment on this article?
Send it.
An expert panel recommended Sunday that doctors stick with tamoxifen as the time-tested treatment for early stage breast cancer, despite evidence that newer drugs may do a better job of preventing recurrence.
The decision affects the care of an estimated 700,000 women in the United States who take tamoxifen to prevent their breast cancer from coming back.
Cancer physicians fielded many calls from patients last December after reports that a newer class of drugs, called aromatase inhibitors, appear slightly more effective.
Some quickly switched their patients, while many others wondered whether they should.
To help them decide, the American Society of Clinical Oncology, the world s largest organization of cancer doctors, convened an expert panel to review the issue.
Their decision: It s too soon to change.
In the end, the new drugs may prove superior, but it will take a few more years of study before doctors can be certain of their advantages as well as their possible risks.
"Clearly if the difference was very, very dramatic, that would color one s thinking, but the difference was small," said Dr. Eric Winer.
"It s proper caution to wait and see what happens before changing practice."
Winer, a physician at Boston s Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, chaired the 18-member panel that released the recommendations at the oncology society s meeting in Orlando.
Tamoxifen has been a standard drug for 20 years for women who have had surgery for breast cancer.
It works by blocking the effects of the female hormone estrogen, which can fuel cancer growth.
The aromatase inhibitors also block estrogen, although in a different way.
They are already widely used to treat women with spreading cancer.
In December, researchers released the results of a head-to-head comparison of tamoxifen and an aromatase inhibitor called Arimidex in 9,366 women with early stage cancer.
After 33 months of follow-up, 90 percent of women getting Arimidex were alive and free of cancer, compared with 88 percent on tamoxifen.
However, women typically take tamoxifen for five years.
So the panel concluded that results after less than three years may not fairly show tamoxifen s advantages.
Furthermore, they said, there is no evidence so far that Arimidex improves women s survival.
"At this point, we would not recommend that doctors and patients start using this as the standard hormonal therapy in postmenopausal women," Winer said.
The study that showed Arimidex s slight advantage will continue to follow women.
At least 10 studies involving over 50,000 women are under way to compare various aromatase inhibitors with tamoxifen.
"Give it two or three years, and we will be in a difference place" for comparing the drugs, Winer said.
Dr. William Gradishar of the Northwestern University said cancer specialists are looking for guidance on which drug to offer.
"This is an evidence-based, cautious statement," he said.
"Some people will disagree with it, but we need longer follow-up to be confident of the results."
Dr. Rowan Chlebowski of Harbor-UCLA Medical Center in Torrance, Calif. said the report "takes the pressure off doctors who think they have to do the latest thing" for their patients.
"We were not expecting support for a wholesale switch," said Mary Lynn Carver, a spokeswoman for AstraZeneca, which makes Arimidex.
"But we expect doctors to discuss this with their patients, and ASCO supports that."
Since Arimidex and other aromatase inhibitors are already on the market, doctors can use them in early stage breast cancer if they wish.
AstraZeneca asked the Food and Drug Administration in February for formal approval of this use and expects an answer by August.
The expert panel said doctors may want to substitute Arimidex in some situations where women cannot safely take tamoxifen because of concern about side effects.
The drug can increase the risk of strokes and uterine cancer.
Arimidex and similar drugs drastically cut circulating estrogen levels, and their major known side effect is an increased risk of fractures.
Other aromatase inhibitors on the market are Femara and Aromasin.
S NOTE:
Medical Editor Daniel Q. Haney is a special correspondent for The Associated Press.
Pope John Paul II has accepted the resignation of an Irish bishop who traveled here to step down in person over allegations he protected a pedophile priest, the Vatican announced Saturday.
Bishop Brendan Comiskey, who announced his resignation Monday, became the third Roman Catholic bishop to step down amid a series of sex-abuse cases rocking the church.
Comiskey, 66, has apologized for not doing enough to halt the trail of abuse perpetrated by a priest from his diocese, the Rev. Sean Fortune.
The Catholic hierarchy in Ireland said in a statement Saturday that Comiskey s successor in the southeast Irish diocese of Ferns would be Bishop Eamonn Walsh.
The Vatican would not immediately confirm the appointment.
Pressure on Comiskey rose after the British Broadcasting Corp. on March 19 showed a documentary on some of Fortune s victims.
Fortune committed suicide in 1999 shortly before he was to stand trial on 66 criminal counts of sexually abusing boys for nearly two decades.
Comiskey was ordained a priest in 1961, became auxiliary bishop for Dublin in 1980, and became bishop of Ferns, the mostly southeasterly diocese in Ireland, in 1984.
Though resigning as a bishop, he was to remain a priest.
The church s leaders in Ireland had already accepted Comiskey s decision, and issued a wider apology - the latest in a long line of such statements since the church s first child sex-abuse cases emerged in Ireland in 1994.
Two other bishops have resigned amid the Church s recent series of sex-abuse cases.
Archbishop Juliusz Paetz of Poznan stepped down late last month amid accusations he made sexual advances on young clerics.
In the United States , Bishop Anthony J. O Connell resigned in March from the Diocese of Palm Beach, Fla., admitting he sexually abused a former seminarian in the 1970s.
The Irish government announced Friday it had appointed a senior lawyer to begin preparatory work for a judicial inquiry into the alleged church cover-up of abuse in Ferns.
Hollywood actors who oppose their union s tentative deal to relax investment limits for talent agents plan to stage a rally Thursday outside the national headquarters of the Screen Actors Guild.
The agreement, narrowly endorsed last month by SAG s national board, has sharply divided the union since it was hammered out in late February following several weeks of closed-door negotiations.
Ballots for the referendum on the pact, which amends SAG s master franchise agreement governing agent-actor relations since 1939, went out Wednesday to 98,000 union members, with results to be announced April 19.
The deal would permit talent agencies for the first time to sell as much as 20 percent of their business to independent TV and film production houses or buy stakes of up to 20 percent in those such companies.
The same cap would apply to talent agency investments made in or received by advertising firms.
Opponents argue the deal would effectively scuttleconflict-of-interest safeguards that prevent agents from having too big an ownership interest in companies for which their clients work.
This is a bad deal, terrible for actors, said SAG treasurer Kent McCord, who chairs the Actors Rights group opposed to the pact.
Our guild is trying to scare members into voting for an incomplete contract that will take away actors rights to uncompromised representation.
Supporters of the deal cite the need to avoid the chaos of deregulation that could occur if the agreement is voted down.
They contend that investments allowed under the deal would be fully disclosed and represent non-controlling interests, leaving the nature of actor-agent relationships unchanged.
The pact still forbids movie studios, television networks or their affiliates from holding a stake in talent agencies.
For the agencies, the deal gives them greater ability to attract much-needed capital and to compete with talent managers in Hollywood who already can represent clients interests while producing movies and TV shows.
The Actors Rights group plans to rally at SAG headquarters at 11:30 a.m. Thursday for an event that will include celebrity speakers and street theater with actors wearing masks.
board members opposing the deal include Seymour Cassel, Richard Dreyfuss , Frances Fisher, Elliott Gould, Valerie Harper, Sally Kirkland, Diane Ladd, Esai Morales and Fred Savage.
Rob Schneider has also announced his opposition, asking last week that SAG set representatives stop distribution of pro-deal material on the set of The Hot Chick at Disney.
Supporters of the deal include SAG president Melissa Gilbert and board members Mike Farrell , Tess Harper, Jane Kaczmarek and Tom LaGrua.
Farrell and McCord debated the issue Wednesday during KPCC-FM s Air Talk show.
Many other high-profile SAG members have been reluctant to take a public position on the deal.
Opposition from stars was a key factor in the decision in early 2000 to scuttle a tentative deal with the agents for a two-year waiver on ownership restrictions.
Authorities speculated on Friday over whether it was suicide or disastrous bad luck that led a pilot to fly his light plane into Italy s tallest building in a crash that triggered fears of a September 11-style attack.
The Swiss-Italian pilot and two other people died when the aircraft plowed straight into one of Milan s few skyscrapers in bright sunshine, gutting the top of the slender building.
Shortly before Thursday s crash, Luigi Fasulo, 67, told Milan s Linate airport by radio there was a small problem with the plane s undercarriage.
Instead of circling the airfield as requested he headed into the city at low altitude.
Italy s government ordered checks on the health record of the pilot and former businessman and on his financial situation.
There are reasons to believe that something strange happened here...
The plane did everything wrong from beginning to end, Transport Minister Pietro Lunardi told reporters.
If this accident had happened before September 11 one might just have talked about destiny, but seeing as it happened after September 11 destiny seems less plausible, he added.
Roberto Formigoni, head of the regional Lombardy government which is based in the scarred, 30-storey skyscraper, speculated openly on whether Fasulo flew into the building on purpose.
The pilot was very experienced and there s every reason to believe it might have been suicide, he said.
Milan s head prosecutor Gerardo D Ambrosio told reporters: The theories are that it was a sudden illness or suicide or a technical breakdown.
Italy s ANSA news agency said Fasulo made a telephone call to police in the Italian town of Como, close to the border with Switzerland, on Thursday morning saying he had lost substantial sums in secretive, cross-border financial transactions.
One newspaper quoted a relative of Fasulo as saying he had intended to kill himself, but the man s wife and nephew both ruled this out, other Italian media reported.
Fellow pilots in the lakeside town of Locarno, where Fasulo took off on his final flight, also rejected the suicide theory.
I saw him yesterday before he took off and he seemed very normal to me, said pilot Pino Scossa, a friend of Fasulo for 40 years.
The idea he committed suicide seems absurd to me.
Police said 29 people were injured in the crash, but by Friday only three people were still in hospital.
News of the incident sent shock waves through jittery world financial markets, seven months after hijackers flew planes into New York s World Trade Center and the Pentagon in Washington.
The area around the Milan skyscraper, which overshadows the city s fascist-era train station, was eerily quiet on Friday as commuters wandered past, necks craned to see the damage.
Broken glass, charred chairs, twisted pieces of metal and paper blown out of the tower littered the foot of the building.
The explosion was so loud even my dog began to howl, said Rina Castello, taking her white mongrel Titi for a morning walk in a nearby square.
People were running in every direction.
I feel better now
but I was sure it was a bomb at the time.
Officials on Thursday quickly ruled out a terror attack and air traffic controllers denied that an initial mix-up over messages could have caused the crash.
Fasulo took off in his propeller-driven Commander 112 aircraft shortly after 5 p.m. (11 a.m. EDT) from Locarno.
According to a transcript of a conversation with controllers, as he approached Linate he reported slight technical problems.
At the same time, a helicopter asked to land but the control tower told it to keep away.
Fasulo mistakenly thought the message was aimed at him and turned his plane away.
He was immediately told of his mistake, but later lost radio contact and did not send a distress signal before the crash.
About 1,750 people work in the 1950s building but the top floors were nearly empty as they were being renovated.
The regional government chief said the first 11 floors of the building might re-open for business as soon as Monday.
Last October, a Scandinavian Airlines System (SAS) passenger jet hit a private plane on a Linate runway, killing 118 people.
A pilots union said on Friday authorities should consider using the busy airport only for bigger aircraft.
Has ABC pulled a stupid Dave trick?
No matter where David Letterman ends up this fall, one clear loser has already emerged: ABC.
If Letterman decides to leave CBS, ABC will likely end up forking over a license fee north of $30 million per year to snag a Late Show that, while critically worshiped, has consistently been a distant second in the ratings to Jay Leno and The Tonight Show.
Letterman loyalists inside the host s Worldwide Pants production company can gripe all they want about weak CBS news lead-ins, but the hard truth is this: America s chosen Leno, and changing channels -- particularly to a network like ABC, currently fourth in primetime -- won t change hearts.
Should Letterman decide to stay put -- still the more likely option -- ABC could find itself staring down a black hole in latenight next September.
Bill Maher and &quot Politically Incorrect are now history, while ABC executives have all but told Ted Koppel and his Nightline staff they re just taking up space until something more profitable comes along.
Either way, ABC and its Disney parent have once again sent a clear signal that they won t let loyalty to talent stand in the way of a quick profit.
Indeed, in the last year, the network has managed to alienate some of its biggest stars: Regis Philbin , Barbara Walters, Dennis Franz , Steven Bochco -- and now, Ted Koppel.
What s more, ABC News and its president, David Westin, have been humiliated by the mere suggestion that Nightline -- once thought untouchable -- is now expendable.
Indeed, Westin didn t even know his own network was talking to Letterman until a newspaper reporter told him so.
This isn t about hurt feelings: Westin and Koppel -- and for that matter, people like Philbin and Walters -- make enough money that it s hard to feel sympathy for their bruised egos.
What s at stake here is the impact all this will have on the morale of rank and file ABC News staffers, who these days must feel like even tinier bits of cheese inside the Mouse House empire.
Star talent thinking of signing up for Westin s team may think twice now that it s known even news gods like Koppel are mere mortals within Disney s world.
Such complaints probably seem a little unreal to ABC and Disney execs, who -- before the Letterman talks became public -- likely thought they were closing in on one of the biggest talent coups in recent TV history.
And in fairness, landing Letterman could be good for ABC in many ways.
It s unlikely ABC would be chasing Letterman if it didn t think it was a sound business move.
Letterman s CBS Late Show makes a lot more money than Nightline and Politically Incorrect (how much more is a matter of some debate).
Some inside ABC believe Letterman could also boost the network s second-place Good Morning America.
The prestige of having a huge star like Letterman on ABC wouldn t be bad, either.
And if ABC is serious about switching to entertainment programming in latenight, signing Letterman -- despite his huge price tag -- is the quickest, easiest way to go about doing that.
Even if Late Show takes a Nielsen hit by moving networks, it s unlikely any other talent currently available could draw the ratings or ad revenue that Letterman would, at least in the short-term.
Harder to understand is why Letterman would want to move to ABC.
The news lead-ins may be better, but CBS has a much stronger primetime base in which to promote Late Show.
And though some inside Worldwide Pants have whined about feeling unloved by CBS, Disney management doesn t usually win raves for being all warm-and-fuzzy toward talent.
There s also the possibility that Letterman could end up looking almost desperate if he moves to yet another network.
Three networks in 10 years -- only Connie Chung has moved around more often.
If Letterman really does want to leave -- and ABC is so hungry to land him -- then maybe CBS president Leslie Moonves ought to let Dave go.
Losing Letterman will hurt, but it s unlikely to be a lasting pain.
In addition to saving a huge chunk of change, CBS would be able to make a fresh run on NBC s latenight supremacy with a younger, less expensive host.
Jon Stewart s reps may want to keep a phone line open.
Have a comment on this article?
Send it.
A hacker claiming to be a 17-year-old girl says she wrote a new worm targeting Microsoft Corp. s (NASDAQ:MSFT) .NET
Web services platform to prove women are capable of creating computer viruses and make a statement against sexism, a computer security company said Monday.
Dubbed the Sharpei worm, it is believed to be the first virus written in C-sharp, the programming language which runs on .NET
platforms, said UK-based Sophos, which received a copy of the virus from the programmer.
She wrote the worm to make a social point and dispel the perception that there aren t female virus writers, said Chris Wraight, U.S.-based technology consultant for Sophos.
The so-called proof-of-concept worm, the second virus targeting .NET, was written partially in Visual Basic , according to Microsoft.
The .NET framework is designed to allow developers to write programs that will enable people to access software online using any device.
Microsoft has staked the future of the company on Web services and said in January it will focus on improving the security of its products in order to gain customer confidence.
Someone going by the handle Gigabyte sent the worm sample to Sophos, saying she was inspired by sexism in the male dominated anti-virus industry, according to Sophos.
In an e-mail, Gigabyte said she chose C-sharp because it is a new language and seemed fun to experiment with.
She said she did not intend for it to spread and created it as an intellectual challenge, to prove it could be done and to annoy Microsoft.
The worm, a self-propagating virus, has not spread in the wild yet and so it has a low-risk rating, Wraight said.
It is written to spread via Outlook e-mail.
It has a subject line that reads Important: Windows update, and purports to be an update from Microsoft that can speed up the performance of systems by 50 percent.
The worm checks to see if the computer has .NET
technology present and if so, it infects certain executable files in specific Windows directories.
It also contains an attachment that when opened forwards the virus to everyone listed in the Outlook address book and displays a message warning that the computer has been infected.
Microsoft, however, does not distribute any patches or updates over e-mail, according to Mike Kass, product manager for .NET framework.
In addition, newer versions of Outlook, such as Outlook 2002, and systems that have Microsoft s Security Update will block the worm, said Kass.
Default settings are configured to restrict unknown code from being executed, he said.
Regardless, Kass warned Windows users to be cautious when allowing executables to install software on their systems.
We ve given you this great car alarm security system, he said.
If you let intruders into your car yourself and you hand them the keys, well, we can make no promises.
Sophos and other anti-virus vendors have released updates to their products to detect and remove the new worm.
Of the prospect that the worm was written for socio-political purposes, Kass said,
I m psyched women are entering this space.
I just don
t know what she s accomplishing by this.
She s neither hurting nor helping people.
Gigabyte s home page said she is a 17-year-old high school senior who likes house, techno and trance music and takes kickboxing classes.
It was not clear where she lives.
In January, a virus written by a Czech programmer was sent to anti-virus vendors that targeted executable files created for .NET technology.
Dubbed Donut, the worm did not spread itself via e-mail, but required someone to save an infected file to a computer hard drive for it to infect other files.
Have a comment on this article?
Send it.
One challenger called President Jacques Chirac tired and old.
Many French voters doubted the integrity of a leader tangled up in various corruption allegations.
But in the end, the debonair president with a touch for the common citizen came through with a landslide re-election victory.
The 69-year-old Chirac on Sunday trounced extreme-right leader Jean-Marie Le Pen, drawing on support from across the country s political spectrum.
"This represents a strong revival for our republic," said Jean-Pierre Raffarin, vice president of the center-right Liberal Democracy party and Chirac ally, on France 3 television.
Dapper, tall and charming, Chirac is a well-bred bon vivant who enjoys such trappings of power as luxury voyages abroad or life in a government-owned palace.
Heir to the conservative mantle of World War II hero Charles de Gaulle, Chirac has been a key figure of the French right since the mid-1970s, steadily advancing up the electoral ladder.
Overseas, he s seen as the consummate diplomat.
The first head of state to meet with President Bush after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, Chirac won widespread praise for the sympathy he showed after flying over the ruins of the World Trade Center .
"When you see that, you really want to cry," he said.
At home, his success with voters can be attributed to his gift for reaching out and touching ordinary people: no politician looks more enraptured when a farmer shows off his cow or appears more thrilled to kiss a baby.
"He is tired, old, the victim of a certain wear-and-tear," one challenger, Socialist Prime Minister Lionel Jospin, said in March.
But the next month, Jospin himself was knocked out of the race in the first round of presidential voting, and decided to retire from politics.
President Chirac, friends say, "is never better than when he is on the campaign trail."
But critics draw a portrait of a man with a credibility problem who uses his presidential immunity to hide from prosecutors trying to investigate numerous scandals that Chirac has been linked to.
"He says he wishes the law were different so he could testify before a court," Dominique Strauss-Kahn, the former Socialist finance minister, said on national television. "
But nothing forbids the president of the Republic from going to testify.
"
Investigators have suggested Chirac used hundreds of thousands of public dollars to pay for personal vacations for himself, his family and his entourage while he was Paris mayor in the early 1990s.
In an explanation that raised more questions, Chirac said the money came from a special fund he was entitled to use as prime minister between 1986 and 1988.
Investigators are also looking into allegations that Paris City Hall under then-Mayor Chirac received millions of dollars in kickbacks in the 1980s and early 1990s, then funneled the money into political parties like Chirac s Rally for the Republic.
The only child of a well-to-do businessman, Chirac apparently had a lively youth.
He was expelled from school for shooting paper wads at a teacher.
He also sold the Communist daily "L Humanite" on the streets for a brief time, and even worked as a soda jerk at a Howard Johnson s restaurant in the United States , where, the story goes, he earned a certificate of merit for his outstanding banana splits.
But Chirac got more serious after serving in the Algerian war, and enrolled at France s Ecole Nationale d Administration, the elite training ground for the French political class.
He was named prime minister for a first time at 41.
A personality clash with President Valery Giscard d Estaing led Chirac to resign, but he quickly plotted his comeback.
He became mayor of Paris in 1977 and used the highly visible office as a power base to regroup.
In the 1981 and 1988 presidential elections, Chirac lost to Mitterrand, a Socialist, but his third try for France s top political prize proved the charm, and Chirac became president in 1995.
In a stunning political miscalculation in April 1997, Chirac dissolved his conservative government and called early legislative elections to boost his parliamentary majority.
The gamble backfired, and the left swept to power, leaving Chirac largely a lame duck, unable to move his political agenda forward for the next five years.
In a new twist on the dangers of extra weight, a study found that women who gain too much during pregnancy face an increased risk of breast cancer later in life.
Doctors have long known that obesity increases a woman s chance of breast cancer.
In fact, staying slim is one of the few things a woman can do that clearly lowers her risk.
But the latest study suggests that piling on the pounds during pregnancy may be especially hazardous.
The study, presented Tuesday, found that women who put on more than 38 pounds during pregnancy had a 40 percent increased risk of developing breast cancer after menopause.
The risk before menopause was no higher than usual.
Fat cells produce estrogen, and many believe the extra hormone is what puts overweight women at higher risk of breast cancer.
Dr. Leena Hilakivi-Clarke, who directed the study, said that getting a burst of estrogen during pregnancy may be especially bad.
"During times when the breast is rapidly developing, estrogen might be particularly harmful.
Pregnancy is one such period," she said.
Hilakivi-Clarke, a researcher at Georgetown University, presented the findings at a meeting in San Francisco of the American Association for Cancer Research.
"The data are provocative because they suggest there may times when the breast is particularly susceptible to increased estrogen levels," said Dr. Joyce O Shaughnessy, a breast cancer specialist at Baylor-Sammons Cancer Center in Dallas.
However, Dr. Eugenia Calle, director of analytic epidemiology at the American Cancer Society, questioned whether weight gain during pregnancy is any worse than weight gain in general.
Many women fail to take off all the extra pounds after they give birth.
Calle said women who put on an extra 30 to 50 pounds during adulthood face approximately double the usual risk of breast cancer after they reach menopause.
"The message to women is to maintain their young adult weight through life," she said.
Hilakivi-Clark said her team has not yet examined whether women who gain extra weight during pregnancy and then take it all off have an increased risk of later breast cancer.
Her study was based on a follow-up of 4,020 postmenopausal women in Finland, 185 of whom developed breast cancer at an average age of 58.
The researchers checked medical records to see how much the women gained during pregnancy.
Adequate weight gain during pregnancy is essential to the baby s health.
Guidelines from the Institute of Medicine say how much women need to put on depends on their body mass index, a widely used measure of fatness.
A woman who is underweight should gain 28 to 40 pounds.
One who is normal weight should gain 25 to 35 pounds.
Someone who is overweight should add 15 to 25 pounds.
And obese women should put on no more than 15 pounds.
Statistics from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention suggest most pregnant women probably put on more than this.
In 2000, the median weight gain was almost 31 pounds.
Twelve percent put on 46 pounds or more.
Pregnancy itself can protect against breast cancer, though only if women get pregnant by age 20.
Those who get pregnant after age 30 actually have a higher risk than women who never have children.
Breast-feeding also is modestly protective.
Medical Editor Daniel Q. Haney is a special correspondent for The Associated Press.
A small tourist plane hit a skyscraper in central Milan Thursday, setting the top floors of the 30-story building on fire, a police official said.
Eyewitnesses reported hearing a loud explosion from the office block, which houses the administrative headquarters of the local Lombardy region and sits next to the city s central train station.
I heard a strange bang
so I went to the window and outside I saw the windows of the Pirelli building blown out
and then I saw smoke coming from them, said Gianluca Liberto, an engineer who was working in the area.
The building is known as the Pirelli skyscraper but the Italian tire and cable company does not operate out of the building.
It is one of the symbols of Italy s financial capital and is 127 meters-high.
A Piper plane has crashed into the building, a police official said.
He added he had no further details.
Britain wakes on Easter Monday to a period of mourning for the Queen Mother, who died at the weekend after a life spanning a century of tumultuous change.
After a Sunday of private royal grief and a modest display of public sorrow, preparations will continue this week for the Queen Mother s funeral to be held next Tuesday, April 9.
Gun salutes will be fired throughout the country on Monday.
The 101-year-old royal matriarch died in her sleep on Saturday with Queen Elizabeth, her elder and surviving daughter, at her bedside.
Dressed in black, the 75-year-old monarch made her first public appearance on Sunday since her mother s death, leading her family in remembrance and prayer at the coffin of the Queen Mother in Windsor s Royal Chapel of All Saints.
Her coffin will be moved the short distance from Windsor to St. James Palace in central London on Tuesday.
On Friday, it will be taken to Westminster Hall, part of the Houses of Parliament , where it will lie in state until the day before the funeral at Westminster Abbey across the road.
The coffin will then travel back by road for a private burial later that day at St. George s Chapel, Windsor, where the Queen Mother will lie beside her beloved husband, King George VI, who died in 1952 at the age of 56.
Though dominating British media, her death has not led to the same public outpouring of grief that followed the sudden death in 1997 of Princess Diana , when thousands flocked to her London home, laying a sea of flowers.
The nation almost ground to a halt for the funeral of the ex-wife of Prince Charles , Queen Elizabeth s son and heir.
The Queen Mother s death came just seven weeks after that of her younger daughter, 71-year-old Princess Margaret, whose ashes will be placed alongside her parents.
Seen by many as the most popular member of the House of Windsor, the Queen Mother was feted as the plucky little woman who stood up to the Nazis by staying in London with her husband during the German blitzkrieg bombing of the British capital in 1940.
Adolf Hitler branded her Britain s most dangerous woman.
The doughty Queen Mum kept the royal family together through seven tempestuous decades -- from the 1936 abdication crisis that propelled her shy husband onto the throne vacated by his wayward elder brother, King Edward VIII, to Prince Charles s bitter divorce from Diana in 1996.
Across Britain, flags on public buildings will fly at half mast until April 9, the end of the national period of mourning for a woman widely seen as representing the best of British.
Artillery salutes will be fired at noon (1000 GMT) on Monday.
Parliament is being recalled on Wednesday so members can pay respects to the nation s favorite grandmother.
There was to be a minute s silence at Easter Monday soccer matches while at race meetings jockeys would wear black armbands in special tribute to a woman who had a passion for horses.
Windsor Castle , Buckingham Palace and Clarence House, the Queen Mother s official London residence, are providing a focus for restrained public mourning.
Flowers were laid at the gates of Buckingham Palace and teddy bears stuffed through the bars.
One scrawled tribute said: Our nation lost its grandmother today.
Under a gray Sunday sky, Britons caught their first glimpse of the coffin.
Draped in her personal standard and topped with pink flowers, it was carried through a corridor of golden daffodils to the small Windsor chapel.
Behind the coffin walked members of the Queen Mother s staff.
One carried a potted jasmine given as an Easter present to the Queen Mother by her favored grandson, Prince Charles.
Charles, who is said to be absolutely devastated by the death of his grandmother, and his two teenage sons flew back from a skiing holiday in the Swiss resort of Klosters.
In a break with custom, the queen allowed the three to fly on the same plane, something usually avoided by the royal family for security reasons.
After the evensong service at the chapel where the coffin had been placed, Charles and his sons left Windsor for their Highgrove home, affording the heir to the throne some time to mourn his grandmother.
The two were particularly close.
The Queen will stay in Windsor with some members of her family until the funeral.
The royal family will end their official period of mourning on April 19, after a memorial service for Princess Margaret.
Until then they will be carrying out official duties, although some engagements may be postponed our canceled, Buckingham Palace said.
Russia withdrew a threat to leave the Salt Lake City Olympics Friday after the biggest political Olympic crisis since the Cold War was resolved in the seclusion of a suburban luxury mansion.
Russian sports leaders, fuming over judging decisions they believed had gone against them at the Salt Lake City Games, called off the threat after talks with International Olympic Committee (IOC) president Jacques Rogge.
The national team will stay, Russia s IOC vice-president Vitaly Smirnov told Reuters.
It will take part until the very end.
Russia will take part in all events, in all competitions and will take part in the closing ceremony.
In the biggest political crisis to hit the Olympics since the boycotts of the 1976, 1980 and 1984 Games, the Russians had threatened Thursday to quit the Games prematurely because of what they perceived was bad and biased judging.
After several emotional outbursts Thursday, the Russians found harmony with Rogge after a meeting in a house in Salt Lake s exclusive suburb of Cottonwood which the Russians have been using for hospitality during the Games.
Rogge had always planned to visit the &quot Russia House on Friday but used the occasion to hold talks.
The former surgeon, keen to calm Russian emotions, kept the affair low-key and did not bring any aides or other senior IOC leaders with him.
After emerging through a door to the kitchen and stepping on to a lush carpet in the living room, Rogge said: I am very pleased with the discussions we had.
The Russians have filed a number of protests since the IOC and the International Skating Union took the unprecedented step of awarding a second gold medal in the figure skating pairs competition to Canadian duo Jamie Sale and David Pelletier, who had finished second.
The decision followed a public outcry and a four-day North American media campaign to overturn the original result in which Russian pair Yelena Berezhnaya and Anton Sikharulidze won the gold on a 5-4 split vote.
After their hotly-favored women s cross-country team was forced to withdraw from Thursday s relay following some abnormalities in blood tests, the Russians patience snapped.
The Russians suffered another reverse Friday when an appeal against Irina Slutskaya s second place in the women s figure skating was rejected.
But, looking relaxed as he stood in the kitchen, Smirnov said Rogge had told him all the Russian complaints would be examined, probably at a meeting of the IOC s executive board on Saturday.
Our side -- the Olympic Committee and sports organizations -- expressed very, big concerns about some judging, he said.
He (Rogge) promised (that) all kinds of remarks which our team have collected will be delivered to him and all remarks will be considered by the IOC.
leaders have been stressing that a withdrawal would be very damaging to Russia since it would punish their athletes.
It would also have affected Moscow s plans to bid for the 2012 Summer Games, the venue of which the IOC will decide in 2005.
We are very happy with everything.
Of course, Russia leaders do realize what kind of consequences there could be if they are not taking part.
Earlier Friday Russian President Vladimir Putin took an unusual swipe at 59-year-old Rogge who was elected into office last July in Moscow, replacing Juan Antonio Samaranch who had been at the top of the IOC for 21 years.
Not the last reason is the change of generations in the International Olympic Committee, Putin said.
Juan Antonio Samaranch has gone and Jacques Rogge has taken his place.
Regrettably for the new leadership, the first time is bound to be a flop.
Have a comment on this article?
Send it.
Linwood Fiedler took the lead of the Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race Monday, leaving Rainy Pass after a break of less than one hour.
Fiedler, last year s runner-up, was the sixth musher to arrive at the checkpoint.
He moved into the lead when he left Rainy Pass after just 40 minutes.
Charlie Boulding led racers into this checkpoint at 10:56 a.m..
Boulding, running his tenth Iditarod, said he arrived hours earlier than expected due to the excellent, hard-packed trail.
"The trail is wonderful.
It s the best I ve ever seen," Boulding said.
The checkpoint at Rainy Pass Lodge is at the base of the pass itself, which takes racers to an altitude of 3,160 feet, the highest point on the trail.
The racers then make the treacherous descent down the Dalzell Gorge.
Boulding arrived just four minutes ahead of DeeDee Jonrowe of Willow.
Three-time Iditarod champion Jeff King appeared eight minutes later, followed by John Baker of Kotzebue at 11:26 a.m. and 1976 Iditarod champion Jerry Riley of Nenana at 11:56 a.m.
Rainy Pass is 224 miles from the start in Anchorage.
Montana musher Doug Swingley, who has won the last three Iditarods, was still at the Finger Lake checkpoint Monday afternoon.
He arrived there in 37th place at 12:17 p.m., barely half an hour before race leader Fiedler left Rainy Pass, 30 miles ahead.
Also resting at Rainy Pass Monday afternoon were Ramy Brooks, Jon Little, Vern Halter, Jim Lanier, Sonny Lindner, Nils Hahn, Mitch Seavey, Sonny King, Ray Redington Jr., Tim Osmar, Lance Mackey, Bruce Lee , Kjietil Backen, Robert Sorlie, Aliy Zirkle, and Al Hardman.
Martin Buser, a three-time Iditarod champion, left Finger Lake at 7:14 a.m. Monday and probably was resting along the trail instead of at the checkpoint.
Harald Tunheim was also out of Finger Lake, followed by five-time champion Rick Swenson.
Copyright 2002 Associated Press.
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
Have a comment on this article?
Send it.
Children who snore may suffer from a treatable condition called sleep apnea that upsets sleep habits and can lead to health and behavioral problems, a pediatricians group said Monday.
If sleep apnea is discovered, it can usually be cured by surgically removing the tonsils and tissues in the back of the throat called adenoids to clear the air pathway, said a report by the American Academy of Pediatrics.
Pediatricians should screen all children for snoring, since chronic snoring is often a symptom of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome, said the report, which was published in this month s issue of the journal Pediatrics.
Estimates show up to 12 percent of preschool children snore, and anywhere from 1 percent to 10 percent suffer from sleep apnea.
In both children and adults, sleep apnea halts breathing for a few seconds at a time, causing fatigue that can lead to developmental and behavioral problems and potentially damaging overall health.
The condition also may inhibit growth hormone secretions, leaving children undersized.
In a separate report on sleeping published in the journal, psychiatrists from the University of California, Davis, advised parents with infants who have difficulty falling asleep or who awaken frequently to provide a soft object such as a blanket to help them self-soothe.
At 3 months of age, children frequently play with their hands to soothe themselves, and at six months may use a soft object such as a blanket.
Some of the older infants in the study opted for a soft toy infused with the mother s smell.
Infants during the first year of life use sleep aids frequently and interchangeably rather than a specific favorite object, researcher Beth Goodlin-Jones wrote.
Britain s scientists won a green light on Wednesday to pioneer the cloning of human embryos for research and set up the world s first embryo cell bank.
An influential House of Lords committee ruled that embryo cloning -- which federally funded academics in the United States are barred from carrying out -- should be allowed to proceed under strict conditions.
Committee chairman Richard Harries, the Bishop of Oxford, said the cells taken from embryos within two weeks of fertilization could be crucial for research into finding a cure for debilitating diseases such as Parkinson s and Alzheimer s.
We conclude that for this to be fully realized, no avenue of research should be blocked off at this stage, Harries told a news conference.
Last year Britain became the first country explicitly to allow the creation of embryos as a source of stem cells -- the primitive master cells which turn into other cell types and could be used to find cures to a wide range of diseases.
The regulations were held up by a court ruling in November after protests by pro-life campaigners, who say creating embryos for research is the first step toward reproductive cloning and that adult human or animal cells should be used instead.
Prime Minister Tony Blair s government rushed through revised legislation and an appeal court upheld the new laws last month, but research was effectively put on hold until Wednesday s announcement by the Lords committee.
The British Medical Association said it strongly supported the verdict.
This research offers real hope to the millions of patients with conditions like Alzheimer s, Parkinson s and diabetes, it said in a statement.
The committee said that one condition for granting a research license to clone human embryos should be that any cell line generated from it be deposited in a stem cell bank.
Before any license was granted, health authorities should also ensure that there were no suitable existing cell lines in the bank.
We are pleased that the Lords have recommended the establishment of a stem cell bank as a matter of urgency.
Such a bank will allow researchers to explore this enormous potential in a controlled environment, said Professor Sir George Radda, chief executive of the Medical Research Council.
Critics of human embryo cloning say it represents the first step on a slippery slope to reproductive cloning.
At the very least there should be an international moratorium on embryo cloning until a ban on reproductive cloning is in place, the independent watchdog Human Genetics Alert said.
The Society for the Protection of Unborn Children said the Lord s report was a whitewash.
membership was stacked with supporters of human cloning, many with close links to bodies with a vested interest in embryo research, SPUC s Anthony Ozimic said.
But paralyzed Superman actor Christopher Reeve says he hopes stem cell research might give him the chance to walk again.
Reeve, confined to a wheelchair since breaking his neck in a riding accident in 1995, told BBC radio this week he hoped scientists would be able to turn the stem cells into spinal cord tissue.
I would go to the UK, I would go anywhere in the world for therapy that is safe and could accomplish the goal of recovery, he said.
Have a comment on this article?
Send it.
Yoko Ono is hoping to give peace a chance in Piccadilly Circus, one of London s top tourist sites.
The widow of former Beatle John Lennon has paid an estimated $213,300) to have the words of his most famous song emblazoned on a billboard:
Imagine all the people living life in peace.
Ono, whose husband was killed by a crazed fan in 1980, said in a statement:
After the horrible events of September 11, I thought it was a very important time to remind people of this message because the world needs peace.
I first put the billboard in Time Square -- it s still up there -- and then in Tokyo with the same message in Japanese and English.
I wanted it in London because it s a city that I have a special love for and fond memories of.
Have a comment on this article?
Send it.
Some types of hormone replacement therapy used to treat women for menopause symptoms may raise the risk of a rare ovarian cancer, Swedish researchers said on Tuesday.
The study adds to the considerations a woman has to make before deciding whether to take hormone replacement therapy.
helps relieve the hot flashes, sexual side-effects and other unpleasant symptoms of menopause and has positive health effects, such as the prevention of osteoporosis and heart disease and, possibly, Alzheimer s disease.
But estrogen alone can increase the risk of uterine cancer, although adding another hormone called progestin reduces this risk.
HRT may also be linked with an increased risk of breast cancer, although this risk in not clear.
Dr. Tomas Riman, of Falu Hospital and the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm and colleagues found a similar pattern with another rare cancer, epithelial ovarian cancer.
Also known as ovarian epithelial cancer, it is one of 10 different types of ovarian cancer, which will kill an estimated 13,900 women in the United States this year.
This particular form develops in the tissues covering the ovary and is hard to treat because the symptoms are difficult to detect.
Writing in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, Riman and his colleagues said women who took estrogen alone, or estrogens combined with a sequential, or cyclic, regimen of progestins, had a higher risk of epithelial ovarian cancer.
But if progestins were taken daily with estrogen, the risk disappeared.
If our findings are replicated, it would be valuable to consider the epithelial ovarian cancer risk increase associated with the use of certain HRT regimens, especially given the prevalence of HRT use and the poor prognosis of epithelial ovarian cancer, Riman s team wrote.
They studied 655 women aged 50 to 74 with epithelial ovarian cancer and compared them to 3,899 women who did not have cancer.
Women who had used estrogens alone had a 43 percent higher risk of developing epithelial ovarian cancer than women who had never used such therapy -- but only if they had an intact uterus.
Women who had undergone hysterectomies and had used estrogens were not at increased risk of ovarian cancer, the researchers found.
The researchers cautioned that this particular type of cancer is rare.
Japan plans to double its whale catch in the northwest Pacific and begin hunting a type of whale it has left alone for years, a government official said Thursday, rebuffing international criticism.
Fifty sei whales will be caught during the June-October season as part of Japan s research of whale feeding habits, migrations and life cycles, said Takanori Ohashi, an official with Japan s Fisheries Agency.
The government submitted its research whaling plans to the International Whaling Commission last Friday, Ohashi said.
Under the program, Japan will hunt 260 whales a year in the northwest Pacific - 150 Minke, 50 Bryde s and 10 sperm whales as well as the sei whales, Ohashi said.
Over the past two years, Japan caught a total of 246 whales in the northwest Pacific.
Japan also hunts around 400 Minke annually in the Antarctic.
The whale hunt is permitted by the IWC, but opponents say Japan s research whaling program is commercial whaling in disguise; whale meat is often sold in Japanese restaurants.
Japan began research whaling in 1987, a year after the IWC banned commercial whaling.
Ohashi said the government decided to target sei whales for research purposes.
He said the government will make its final decision on the hunt of sei whales after listening to opinions at IWC s annual meeting, which will be held in Japan in May.
Averaging 40-50 feet long, fast-swimming sei whales are the largest baleen whales after blue whales and finbacks.
The Japanese government estimates there are around 100,000 sei whales worldwide, including about 28,000 in the northwest Pacific, Ohashi said.
Copyright 2002
Associated Press.
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
Have a comment on this article?
Send it.
British scientists on Wednesday got a green light to conduct research using stem cells from cloned human embryos and set up the world s first embryo cell bank.
An influential House of Lords committee ruled that such research--which federally funded academics in the United States are barred from carrying out--should be allowed to proceed under strict conditions.
In therapeutic cloning, scientists extract the nucleus of a patient s cell and transplant it into an egg that has been stripped of its own nucleus.
The egg is coaxed to grow into an embryo, which contains stem cells, the master cells that are the building blocks for all types of human tissue.
While this embryo theoretically could develop into a cloned human if implanted into a woman s uterus, scientists harvest the stem cells in the lab within days.
The procedure is controversial because some people view it as creating life only to destroy it.
Committee chairman the Rt.
Honourable Richard Harries, the Bishop of Oxford, said embryonic stem cells could be crucial for research into finding a cure for diseases such as Parkinson s and Alzheimer s.
We conclude that for this to be fully realised, no avenue of research should be blocked off at this stage, Harries told a news conference.
Britain last year became the first country explicitly to allow the creation of embryos by nuclear transfer as a source of stem cells.
The regulations were held up by a court ruling in November.
Prime Minister Tony Blair s government rushed through revised legislation and an appeal court upheld the new laws last month, but research was effectively put on hold until Wednesday s announcement by the Lord s committee.
The British Medical Association said it strongly supported the verdict.
This research offers real hope to the millions of patients with conditions like Alzheimer s, Parkinson s and diabetes, the group s Head of Professional Activities, Dr. Vivienne Nathanson, said in a statement.
She added that while human stem cell research is promising, progress in that field may rely on a better understanding of embryonic cells.
It is therefore essential that research using both adult and embryonic stem cells should continue together, she said.
The Royal Society also offered its own endorsement of the decision.
I think we can justifiably say society as a whole has made the decision that we should investigate the potential of developing powerful new treatments for serious diseases from both embryonic and adult stem cells, Professor Richard Gardner said.
The committee said that one condition for granting a research licence to clone human embryos should be that any cell line generated from it be deposited in a stem cell bank.
Before any licence was granted, health authorities should also ensure that there were no suitable existing cell lines in the bank.
We are pleased that the Lords have recommended the establishment of a stem cell bank as a matter of urgency.
Such a bank will allow researchers to explore this enormous potential in a controlled environment, said Professor Sir George Radda, chief executive of the Medical Research Council.
Critics of human embryo cloning say it represents the first step on a slippery slope to reproductive cloning--a charge the committee strongly denied.
But paralysed Superman actor Christopher Reeve says he hopes stem cell research might give him the chance to walk again.
Reeve, confined to a wheelchair since breaking his neck in a horse riding accident in 1995, told BBC radio earlier this week he hoped scientists would be able to turn the stem cells into spinal cord tissue.
I would go to the UK, I would go anywhere in the world for therapy that is safe and could accomplish the goal of recovery, he said.
Have a comment on this article?
Send it.
SEATTLE, Oct. 17 ? 
Close your eyes, and this could have been 1996 or 1998 or 1999 or 2000, the championship years.
The New York Yankees have played this game ?
this smooth, methodical 4-2 victory over the Seattle Mariners in Game 1 of the American League Championship Series ?
dozens of times in their half-decade of October dominance.
Eight powerful innings from Andy Pettitte, a homer from Paul O'Neill, a save from Mariano Rivera.
And at the end of the month, invariably, a ring.
A week ago at this time, the Yankees were down two games to none to the Oakland Athletics and headed to California to confront the potential end of their dynasty.
But now, after three straight wins to vanquish the A's and a fourth here today at Safeco Field to take a 1-0 lead in the best-of-seven series, they have acquired that Yankee glow ?
that look of quiet confidence and robotic efficiency that has propelled them to four World Series titles in the last five years.
They have played this game dozens of times, and they have run this table before.
Perhaps the only difference this time is the degree of difficulty.
"All these postseasons take on similarities," Yankees designated hitter David Justice said.
"There are common characteristics on championship teams: solid pitching, good defense, timely hitting.
I guess that's what this ballclub has done more consistently than others ballclubs have done."
Yankees Manager Joe Torre ?
or for that matter, any knowledgeable Yankees fan ? could have closed his eyes and managed this game in his sleep.
Torre made only two moves, each of them obvious.
Shane Spencer for O'Neill, the hobbled veteran, in the top of the eighth, and Rivera for Pettitte in the ninth.
Only two other pitchers warmed up in the bullpen, and they were obvious, too: left-hander Mike Stanton and right-hander Ramiro Mendoza.
Pettitte's impeccable command and preternatural poise, built up over five previous Octobers, kept them in the bullpen.
Mariners starter
Aaron Sele could have closed his eyes and been transported back to 1998 or 1999, when he was with the Texas Rangers, or last season, his first with Mariners.
In each of those years, he ran into the Yankees in the postseason, and each time he lost.
Sele, who battled command problems for six innings today, fell to 0-5 with a 4.73 earned run average in his postseason career, and 0-4 with a 5.29 ERA against the Yankees.
Sele's downfall today came in the fourth inning.
Already trailing 1-0, he fell behind in the count to the first two hitters, and when those two hitters were done, the Yankees' lead was 3-0.
Jorge Posada led off by doubling off the right field wall.
The throw from right fielder Ichiro Suzuki beat Posada to second, but shortstop Carlos Guillien didn't tag Posada until after he reached the bag.
O'Neill, who hits from the left side, was simply trying to pull a ground ball to the right side of the infield to advance Posada to third.
Instead, Sele served up a high fastball that O'Neill yanked over the wall for a two-run homer.
O'Neill, whose retirement at the end of this season is one of the worst-kept secrets in baseball, hit just .091
(1 for 11) in the first round, but today he was a living monument to his team's remarkable postseason success.
"I think we're just used to winning big games," he said.
"It doesn't mean you can just show up and expect these things to happen. . . .
But when we take the field, we've been successful with what we do because of our great pitching and, once in a while, getting a big hit."
For Pettitte, today's victory added another impressive entry to his rapidly growing postseason resume.
He is 9-5 in the postseason, and the Yankees are 16-5 in his 21 starts.
The seventh inning today bespoke Pettitte's poise.
Holding a 3-1 lead, he gave up a leadoff single to second baseman Bret Boone, then settled in to face Edgar Martinez, perhaps the most dangerous hitter in Seattle's lineup.
At one point, as Martinez was working the count to 3-2, Yankees first baseman Tino Martinez strolled to the mound to tell Pettitte the shadows had made it difficult for him to see the ball at the plate the previous inning."
That relaxed me a little bit," said Pettitte, who proceeded to strike out Edgar Martinez, then get Mike Cameron to hit into an inning-ending double play.
"It made me feel like I had a little bit of an advantage."
Today, the things the Mariners had come to count on, the things that propelled them to an AL-record 116 wins, deserted them.
They failed to manufacture runs.
They failed to get a lead to turn over to their superb bullpen.
Suzuki, the dangerous leadoff man who led the league in hits, stolen bases and batting average, failed to reach base in three at-bats against Pettitte, who exploited Suzuki's one weakness ?
his free-swinging approach (only 30 walks all year).
"That was huge for us, keeping him off base," Torre said.
"If he's on base, it's so much tougher to go through the middle of that lineup."
With one out in the ninth, Suzuki doubled into the left field corner against Rivera and scored on a pair of wild pitches.
The Mariners got the potential tying run to the plate when Bret Boone drew a two-out walk.
But with a sell-out of 47,644 screaming for a hit, Rivera got Edgar Martinez to ground out to second to end the game.
"Good pitching, a timely hit," shortstop Derek Jeter said, repeating the Yankees' mantra with typical detachment.
"More often than not, you're going to win when you play like that. . . .
You can call it a typical Yankee win.
I just call it a win."
MLB Basics
The news came as the Pakistan-based Afghan Islamic Press reported the Taliban's supreme spiritual leader, Mullah Mohammed Omar, had agreed to leave the southern city of Kandahar and head for the mountains along with members of his inner circle.
U.S. officials said they are skeptical.
"I don't believe it," Rear Adm. John Stufflebeem, a senior officer on the military's Joint Staff, told reporters at a Pentagon briefing.
Days after Omar promised a fierce battle for the Afghan city that spawned the Taliban and served as its spiritual stronghold through its five years in power, the AIP reported today that Omar had negotiated a handover of Kandahar to two local mujahideen leaders. 
Earlier today, U.S. intelligence sources said they had credible evidence that Mohammed Atef, an Egyptian whose daughter is married to Osama bin Laden's son and was believed to be a senior leader in the al Qaeda chain of command, was killed by a U.S. airstrike in Kabul in the last two days.
Atef was indicted with bin Laden in the bombings of two U.S. Embassies in Africa in 1998 and was believed to have been involved in the Sept. 11 attacks in the United States.
While stopping short of an official confirmation of the reports, U.S. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld told reporters today he had "seen the reports and they seem authoritative." 
Earlier today, Rumsfeld said U.S. special forces were in southern Afghanistan and directly engaging al Qaeda members and Taliban troops in their search for bin Laden and Omar.
"They are killing Taliban that won't surrender and al Qaeda that are trying to move from one place to another," Rumsfeld told reporters.
The United States now has at least 300 special operation troops on the ground in Afghanistan and U.S. forces are shifting to a strategy of staging fewer bombing runs while making a stronger effort on the ground to find bin Laden. 
Iranian radio reported that bin Laden, the prime suspect in the Sept. 11 attacks, had probably fled from southern Afghanistan into neighboring Pakistan.
A spokesman for the Pakistani Foreign Ministry today dismissed the report as "totally baseless and devoid of any truth."
During his press briefing today, Rumsfeld also said there was every reason to believe bin Laden and Omar were still inside Afghanistan. 
Atef's reported killing came as massive U.S. airstrikes on al Qaeda targets in the capital of Kabul and the southern Afghan city of Kandahar continued.
Among other targets, U.S. jets hit the Taliban Foreign Ministry in Kandahar today. 
Intelligence sources tell ABCNEWS officials first surmised Atef's death after putting a target under aerial surveillance after it was hit, and observing a frantic search through the through the wreckage and then intercepting panicked phone calls about what had happened.
American forces have not yet been able to search the site for physical evidence.
A loyal follower of bin Laden
, Atef carried a bounty of $25 million on his head after a rapid rise to the top of the al Qaeda military committee.
His primary responsibility, according to intelligence sources, was the training of new members in al Qaeda camps in Afghanistan.
A 21-page dossier released by the British government last month implicated Atef in the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. 
A big man with a flowing white beard, the former Egyptian police officer was a member of the Egyptian-based Al-Jihad group and is believed to have introduced bin Laden to another key al Qaeda leader and a fellow Egyptian national, Ayman al-Zawahiri. 
Atef's killing, if confirmed, would be the latest in a week of military successes that have stripped the fleeing Taliban of control of the country and most of its major cities. 
In the northern city of Kunduz, an estimated 10,000 Taliban fighters, a number of them foreign mercenaries from Pakistan and Chechnya, are currently locked in by Northern Alliance forces. 
According to ABCNEWS' Don Dahler in the northern city of Taloqan near Kunduz, a Northern Alliance commander today gave the Taliban fighters 48 hours to surrender.
But due to reports of the Northern Alliance's grisly treatment of foreign mercenaries, most reporters believe the mercenaries would fight to the last man. 
If that is the case, Kunduz could become the site of one of the fiercest and bloodiest battles for Afghanistan.
Kandahar saw fierce bombings overnight and into the dawn today, when U.S. planes pounded the city's eastern districts, targeting, among others, the Taliban's foreign ministry offices.
The Pakistan-based Afghan Islamic Press reported 11 civilian casualties in the bombing, but there were no independent verification of the report. 
Concerned over increasing reports of civilian casualties, Muslim countries have, in the past, appealed for a U.S. military halt during the Islamic holy month of Ramadan, which began today, but Washington has rejected the appeals citing concerns that a halt would stall the momentum of the military campaign. 
Exactly a week after the Northern Alliance began its swift series of victories heralded by the takeover of Mazar-e-Sharif, the commander of the U.S. campaign, Army Gen. Tommy Franks, said the "noose was tightening" around bin Laden.
About 100 British troops arrived at Bagram air base near Kabul today to prepare for humanitarian operations.
Around 60 French troops were also on their way to Mazar-e-Sharif to help the aid effort there. 
The fall of most of Afghanistan to the Northern Alliance this week has been largely welcomed by the Afghan population, sickened by five years of hard-line Taliban rule that has seen famine and devastation.
But there is growing anxiety inside Afghanistan that the country will wind up in a state of anarchy similar to what it experienced in 1992 when violent squabbles among warlords allowed the Taliban to gain power.
Kabul is being held by just one faction of the Northern Alliance, the Tajik-dominated Jamiat-i Islami, but a thousand ethnic Hazara soldiers are on the way.
More than a quarter of Kabul's population are Hazaras and the leadership is concerned for the safety of its people there.
The western city of Herat is being held by forces loyal to Ismail Khan, a respected Northern Alliance leader, while on the other city of the country, the eastern city of Jalalabad has reportedly been seized by another commander.
And in the situation in Kandahar remains unclear.
The international community has been working around the clock to put together a multi-ethnic transitional government under U.N. auspices to administer Afghanistan.
An adviser to former Afghan King Zahir Shah, widely regarded as a unifying force in the fractured country, today said the ex-monarch would return to Afghanistan when a proper political mechanism was in place. 
But he also warned that Shah would not return as an ordinary citizen.
The statement came days after former President Burhanuddin Rabbani, the titular leader of the Northern Alliance since he was ousted from Kabul by the Taliban in 1996, said Shah could only return to Afghanistan as a private citizen. 
U.N. officials and aid agencies have expressed concern over reports that civilians and captured soldiers were massacred as Northern Alliance troops advanced into Taliban-controlled areas. 
Amid reports that 100 young Taliban recruits were executed after surrendering in Mazar-e-Sharif late last week, a spokeswoman for the U.N. Human Rights Commission today called for an investigation into the reports and for assurances that the perpetrators of any human rights violations be brought to justice. '
John McWethy contributed to this report.
Whatever the reason, a two-ton, 20-foot long dinosaur pressed its clawed feet into soft sand about 163 million years ago and left tracks that reveal how this hulking animal could switch gears from a stroll to a run.
"Paleontologists have thought that smaller dinosaurs could reach high speeds, but there has not really been direct evidence that the large ones could reach decent speeds," said Paul Upchurch, a paleontologist at the University of Cambridge. 
The tracks of the theropod a two-legged carnivorous dinosaur were fossilized into white limestone and then spotted a few years ago in a quarry in Oxfordshire, England. 
Dozens of dinosaur tracks have been found throughout the world, including in the western and northeastern United States.
But the Oxfordshire quarry tracks are unique for the way they illustrate two very different kinds of locomotion in the strides of a single animal.
"We don't often see this kind of different types of walking in the same animal in the same trackway," said Mathew Carrano, a paleontologist at the State University of New York in Stony Brook.
At the start of the nearly 600-foot-long track, the footprints indicate the dinosaur waddled with a wide gait placing its three-clawed feet far to the right and to the left.
Upchurch says the dinosaur's wide stride suggests it may have been treading on slippery ground.
About midway through the stretch, the dinosaur's prints change dramatically.
Rather than a zig-zag of wide steps about nine feet apart, the stride is doubled and the prints follow nearly a straight line.
That suggests the animal quickly accelerated from an amble to a run or at least to a very brisk walk. 
By estimating the leg length of the animal based on its foot size, and measuring its stride length, Paul Upchurch and his colleague Julia Day calculated the animal was walking at about 4 miles an hour (a very fast walking pace for a person) and then sped up to 18 miles an hour.
Day and Upchurch wrote about the unusually fast-paced dinosaur and its tracks in this week's issue of the journal Nature .
James Farlow, a paleontologist at Indiana-Purdue University was particularly intrigued by the animal's top speed estimates.
By building computer models of running theropods, Farlow and his team recently calculated the animals could not reach speeds any faster than 18.3 miles an hour without stumbling or ripping a muscle.
"Our argument was based on limb strength calculations, and some goofy worries about the risk of an injury to a huge biped if it were to fall while running," said Farlow.
"It's interesting that the trackway estimate is close to my estimate."
Others caution that estimating speed from footprints can be dicey science. 
"The margin of error can be large, even with living animals," said John Hutchinson, a dinosaur locomotion expert at Stanford University.
Regardless of the animal's exact speed, the tracks clearly show the carnivore changed its gait in a quick moment.
Why?
That's something scientists can never know for sure. 
But researchers found other tracks in the quarry that offer a possible clue: It seems plant-eating sauropods were not far away, which could mean the meat-eating theropod just might have spotted lunch.
The three handled the same letter that was found to have traces of anthrax and was addressed to NBC News anchor Tom Brokaw.
That letter is believed to be the one that caused Brokaw's assistant to test positive for cutaneous anthrax.
New York City Mayor Rudolph Giuliani said all three new exposure cases are being treated with antibiotics.
He said that based on the number of spores found in the three people they are not expected to face any complications.
"They are being treated," he said.
"This does not mean they have anthrax."
Since the announcement Friday that Brokaw's assistant had anthrax, New York police have received more than 100 calls from panicked residents who feared they too might have been exposed.
"None of them have proven to be anything else but negative," Giuliani said.
Kenneth Cooper, an editor at the Boston Globe asked to be tested for anthrax two weeks after having received a threatening letter and after waking up on Saturday with flu symptoms, according to Reuters.
Anxiety about the disease has spread across the country, fanned by the announcement Saturday that five more employees of American Media Inc. in Boca Raton, Fla., tested positive for possible exposure to anthrax.
That brought the total number of exposure cases there to eight.
One of the eight died after inhaling anthrax spores.
The five new Florida exposures were found after preliminary blood tests suggested exposure to anthrax.
In New York, anthrax spores were found in the noses of the police officer and a lab technician and on the face of a second technician.
"It means they had an exposure," American Media spokesman Gerald McKelvey told The Associated Press.
"It doesn't mean they have anthrax."
"They are all fine," American Media spokesman Gerald McKelvey said about the five employees.
"They have been reporting to work.
They are taking their medication."
None of the five were said to be sick or in the hospital.
CDC officials would not confirm the exposures because testing was not complete.
On Friday, the FBI said test results of 965 people who were in the building recently found no new infections. 
The presence of anthrax was found in a letter sent to a Microsoft Licensing office in Reno, Nevada.
The letter was sent from Malaysia, where cells of Osama bin Laden's network are believed to operate, has tested positive for anthrax in two of three preliminary tests.
Four of the six people believed to have come into contact with the contaminated letter have tested negative in preliminary exams for inhalant, or airborne, anthrax.
The other two people have not been cleared yet.
Samples collected from them are being tested by the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, said Barbara Hunt, an official with the Washoe, Nevada County Health Office, during a news conference.
The final results of the nasal swab tests won't be known until Monday, Hunt said.
The six individuals are the only ones being monitored for possible exposure to anthrax, Nevada Gov. Kenny Guinn said.
"This is a very, very low risk to public health," Guinn said Saturday.
The Malaysian government pledged to bring "the full weight of the law" against anyone shown to be involved in the letter sent from Malaysia to the Microsoft office in Nevada.
Foreign Minister Syed Hamid Albar told the Associated Press that Malaysian officials were "shocked and deeply disturbed" over the matter.
Malaysia appealed to the FBI for all relevant information about the case.
On Saturday, authorities said a letter addressed to Brokaw and postmarked Sept. 18 in Trenton, N.J., contained a substance that tested positive for anthrax spores.
Authorities believe that letter contained the anthrax that infected the NBC employee.
Another letter postmarked Sept. 20 in St. Petersburg, Fla., was first believed to have been the infected letter but it has tested negative.
Erin O'Connor, Brokaw's personal assistant, contracted cutaneous, or "skin," anthrax less dangerous than inhaled anthrax and rarely fatal if treated.
Because Trenton, N.J. is a major collection and dispersal point for mail in the region, it was not clear where the letter originated.
A second NBC News assistant who handled the Sept. 18 letter was tested Saturday for exposure.
She was taking antibiotics and exhibited possible early symptoms of anthrax, including a low-grade fever, swollen lymph nodes and a rash.
Several floors of the NBC headquarters at 30 Rockefeller Center will remain closed for at least a few days as health officials test the building.
So far, 358 employees have been tested along with other workers in the area.
Despite being the apparent target of the threat, Brokaw maintained a normal schedule and was seen Saturday shopping in a New York suburb.
Several passersby wished him well and asked about his assistant.
"She'll be fine," Brokaw replied.
"But this is no isolated incident." 
Since Friday, reports of anthrax exposure or possibly contaminiated mail have cropped up elsewhere around the country including at media outlets such as The New York Times , CBS News' Washington bureau and Sony Pictures Entertainment in Culver City, Calif.
but they were found to be false alarms.
President Bush referred to the infections and scares Saturday in his radio address to the nation.
"I understand that many Americans are feeling uneasy," he said.
"But all Americans should be assured: We are taking strong precautions.
We are vigilant, we are determined, the country is alert."
Health and Human Services
Secretary Tommy Thompson said today the government is taking steps to be ready to respond to any health-related terrorist threat that might arise.
"We will be able to respond, but we can't take care of every contingency at this point in time," Thompson said today on ABCNEWS' This Week .
"We are prepared for what we know is out there, and that's what we want to make sure the American public knows."
For decades, scientists have been in awe of the lowly spider and the magical material it uses to spin its web.
After all, strands of spider silk are a mere one-tenth the thickness of human hair, yet they can snag a bee traveling 20 miles per hour without breaking.
Ounce for ounce, spider silk is five times stronger than steel and about three times tougher than man-made fibers such as Kevlar.
And that makes the material ideal for all sorts of interesting uses from better, lighter bulletproof vests to safer suspension bridges. 
But "harvesting" spider silk hasn't been easy.
Unlike silkworms, spiders aren't easy to domesticate. "
Spiders are territorial carnivores, they eat each other if placed in contact of in close proximity," says Jeffrey Turner, president and CEO of Nexia Biotechnoloies, Inc.
"It's like trying to farm tigers."
Now, researchers at the Quebec-based Nexia along with scientists at the U.S. Army's Soldier Biological Chemical Command (SBCCOM) in Natick, Mass., say they may have figured a way out of the sticky situation. 
In the latest issue of Science, the researchers report that they've managed to successfully create artificial spider silk that's nearly as good as the real thing and without involving a single spider.
How?
Turner and his team of bio scientists took the genes responsible for creating spider silk into the cells of mammals, such as goats.
Using those genes, the re-engineered goats were then able to produce in their milk the same protein that makes up spider's silk.
Turner says that by isolating those proteins from the goats' milk, they were then able to "spin" a thread remarkably similar to natural spider silk.
"On things like toughness and modulus of elasticity the ability to stretch without breaking we're right on the money," says Turner.
Still, Turner does note there are still many other factors that need to be worked out before we see bridges built with man-made silk.
For one, the amount of silk-building protein that Nexia has been able to produce has been limited to a few strands.
And it isn't clear yet how much protein may be able to be harvested in such a manner.
Turner says his team expects to have a second research paper that would examine such details out by the end of this year.
And Nexia's experimental silk strands aren't an exact match yet.
Turner notes that they're only 20 percent to 40 percent as strong as natural spider silk.
"We still have more work to do," says Turner.
"But to get this far is just a step forward."
Herd of Silky Goats? 
And moving even further forward is what really excites Turner and his military partners. 
The most promising aspect of their research so far: The spider genes are faithfully passed on among the experimental goats.
And that means producing more artificial silk might be as simple as breeding more of the genetically-enhanced goats naturally.
Since starting the experiment three years ago, Turner says Nexia's flock in Montreal has grown to nearly 50 goats.
Within the next several years he expects the flock to scale up to "several thousand."
And as the company continues its research and grows out the herd, Turner believes that it won't be long before we could see commercial applications.
Nexia has already plans to market the material, dubbed BioStell, for use as fine suture material and biodegradable fishing line by 2003 or 2004.
If all goes well by then, he says it wouldn't be too much of a stretch to see lightweight body armor made of artificial spider silk within three to five more years. '
Ned Potter and Paul Eng contributed to this report.
Beyond the copper, electricity and silicon that make up the bulk of today's computers, NASA scientists are looking into super fast optical computers, which would replace electrons zooming through metal with light waves refracting through man-made, organic molecules.
Though the technology may not become reality for another 15 years, scientists said, the power of optical computers will make today's machines look as slow as abacuses.
"Optically, we can solve a problem in one hour which would take an electronic computer 11 years to solve," said Hossin Abduldayem, a senior research scientist at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Ala. 
Optics the science of light is already used in computing, most often in the fiber-optic glass cables that currently transmit data down Internet lines much more quickly than traditional copper wires.
Unlike a copper cable, which sends electricity one pulse at a time, optical fibers can transmit several pieces of data as waves of different colors of light which can travel down a fiber simultaneously.
That's much faster. 
"When you send information electronically it has to be done sequentially, whereas with this you can do parallel processing," said Don Frazier, chief scientist for physical chemistry at MSFC.
"There's no limitation on how many beams or packets of information you can send at once." 
As electronic chips get denser and denser, and the tiny switches that let computers make decisions get smaller and smaller, eventually they're going to reach a physical limit where circuits can't get any smaller, Frazier said.
That's where optical computers come in.
Using light moving through and refracted by thin films of man-made organic molecules rather than electrons streaming through metal, they would move and process data much faster.
Just like the difference between fiber-optic cables and copper wire, optical computers will be able to do parallel computations where electronic machines have sets of lines that move electrons one at a time, Frazier said. 
A group of researchers from the University of Southern California has already developed an organic molecule which could theoretically function as a switch three times as fast as the industry standard, Abduldayem wrote in an academic paper, "Recent Advances in Photonic Devices for Optical Computing." 
But Abduldayem and Frazier admit that optical computers are at least a decade away.
Today's materials require much too much power to work in consumer products, they said.
Coming up with the right materials may take five years or more, and it may be a decade after that before optical computing products appear. 
Dim View of Optics? 
may be riding the all-optical wave with a long-term vision, but some other scientists say the nearer future isn't glowing for machines that run on light.
Most shorter-term research is focused on advances in electronics which are promising vastly improved computers with a mix of optical and electronic components, they said. 
"All-optical computing has sort of gone out of vogue," said Eric van Stryland, interim director of the school of optics at the University of Central Florida.
"Electronics has gotten very good at doing computing, but optics is very good at transmitting information.
Computers will be opto-electronic computers," he said. 
Optical connections within electronic computer systems will speed data between the parts of a computer, he said, and optical switches will mix in with electronic processors to move information quickly without generating the heat that comes off copper wires. 
Optical switches, gates, and "nano-optics" a combination of optical technology and very, very tiny electronic parts will help speed computers of the future, said Daniel Blumenthal, a professor of electrical and computer engineering at the University of California, Santa Barbara.
In a January Scientific American article, Blumenthal described optical networking technologies that can move data at 160 gigabits per second.
That's 16,000 times faster than today's average Ethernet connection. 
All-optical technologies may still come to pass further in the future, he said.
And even beyond that are "quantum computers," which use the properties of quantum mechanics to process data at incredibly high speeds.
(See related story, right.)
You'll probably see those on your desk between 2030 and 2050, Abduldayem said.
A fluorescent green potato plant may seem like a biotechnology nightmare come true, but scientists claim it could save agricultural costs and tackle dire water shortage problems in the future.
Rather than relying on uncertain soil tests and weather forecasts to gauge when their crops need water, farmers instead could read the fluorescence of the specially engineered potatoes.
The innovation holds potential to influence a very important resource since potatoes are one of five major crops that feed three-quarters of the world s population.
And growing potatoes requires an even more vital resource water. 
There have been signals that by 2050, water could be the most expensive agricultural product in the world, says Anthony Trewavas, a biologist at Cambridge University in Cambridge, England.
So if you can provide a device that signals when a farmer s crop needs water, not when he supposes it needs water, then you can save money. 
Trewavas and his colleagues created the unusual potato plant by borrowing a gene from an animal that glows green naturally the luminous jellyfish, aequorea victoria .
The team spliced the gene into the potato so when the plant first senses it s in need of water, it triggers a process to begin conserving water as well as the inserted process that makes it glow green.
When exposed to black light, Trewavas explains, the dehydrated plant glows like a white shirt in a disco.
The plant is expected to be ready for the field in about five to 10 years.
Trewavas envisions that farmers could plant the crop in strategic locations throughout their fields as signal crops.
The engineered potatoes would then be removed before normal potatoes are harvested for eating.
It s very easy to overwater potatoes by watering too often or too much, explains Steve Love of the Aberdeen Research and Extension Center College of Agriculture at the University of Idaho.
If we could relieve either one of these problems it could not only prevent wasting water, but also prevent nutrients from leaking from the soil. 
Overwatering potato crops sometimes causes nitrates in the soil, as well as nutrients in the potato to run off into water tables that are inaccessible to the plant, Love explains. 
Trewavas first thought of the idea while traveling through rural Scotland where he saw farmers watering their potato fields even after a heavy rainfall.
Farmers tend to favor overwatering potato crops, says Trewavas, since the plant, which originated as a crop more than 6,000 years ago in the moist environs of the Andes, tends to grow larger spuds when offered an abundance of water.
But an abundance of water might not always be available in the future.
The signs of growing water shortages are worldwide.
In the United States, the Colorado River has dwindled from a once gushing river to one that often dries up before reaching the Gulf of California.
Residents in Alabama and Florida are in skirmishes with officials in Georgia about water supplies from shared river basins. 
In China, the Yellow River ran completely dry in 1997.
And the Nile River in Africa and the Ganges River in South Asia as among other rivers that often run dry before reaching the sea.
Water has been an abundant resource and an essentially free resource
so we take it for granted, says Worldwatch Institute President Lester Brown.
We now know we can t do that anymore. 
Rebecca Goldberg, a biologist at Environmental Defense, points out that while biotechnology can be useful, issues like water shortages and changing agricultural practices are complex and require complex solutions.
Making sustainable agriculture and providing foods is a really complicated problem that has to do with how governments and farmers manage crops, she says.
There is no one solution.
If anything biotech is only one small piece of the puzzle. 
Clen Atchley, a potato farmer in Ashton, Idaho, isn t yet certain how much a glowing green potato plant could serve his needs.
Right now Atchley hires a consultant to inspect his 1,100 acres of potato fields every week.
He says the consultant uses probes to take readings of soil moisture as well as simply feeling the soil between his fingers to detect how much water the crops need.
Atchley says his consultant s work seems to be accurate enough.
But, he adds, he s open to new ideas out of necessity.
Maybe they ve got something for us, says Atchley.
Usually these new ideas don t work, but sometimes they do.
You don t want to be first in this business that s dangerous.
But you better be second or third to survive.
Researchers with Royal Philips Electronics NV, the Dutch electronics giant, say you won't use the phone to call and complain to the radio station.
Instead, you'll use it to access a sophisticated music database that can automatically find the song's name based on the way it sounds or its audio "fingerprint." 
The music identification system that Philips' scientists have been testing in their labs at Eindhoven, Netherlands, uses a technique called "hashing.
" It's a process typically used in cryptography to help ensure that long electronic messages between computers arrive safely and completely. 
Hashing works by using the words or data within the message to create short unique codes.
These codes are then transmitted along with the original message.
If the receiving computer can't recreate the same unique codes from the message it has received, it means the data has been corrupted and needs to be resent.
Philips researchers use a similar hashing method for their experimental electronic music identification system.
Each song or piece of music is divided into 33 narrow frequency bands.
The energy levels how loud or soft each frequency becomes are measured and used to create the song's hash codes. 
The codes or fingerprints are stored in a computer database along with the song's title, artist, and other musical information.
When music listeners hear an unfamiliar song they want identified, they would dial a special number and allow the computer to "listen" to the music being played.
The computer would then convert the sound into hash codes and attempt to find a match within the Philips database.
Once a match is found, the computer sends the song's ID data back for display on the cell phone's screen.
Philips says that its hash scheme allows for audio fingerprints that are very small and that translates into very fast and efficient song identification.
The researchers say that a prototype setup in its labs was able to correctly name a song after "hearing" less than four seconds of music.
Coming to a Cell Phone
Near You? 
Identifying music by unique audio qualities isn't entirely new.
Other companies such as Relatable in Alexandria, Va., have similar musical fingerprinting schemes. 
Jim Healy, a spokesman for Relatable, says that his company's technology could be modified to match Philips' system, but he wasn't sure there was an immediate demand for such a "solution." 
"With [Philips'] setup, you have to sell to [cell phone]
service providers and I don't know if there's a market for that," says Healy.
Instead, he believes that the more pressing need is among the nascent online music subscription services which will need the technology to find illegal copies of their copyrighted digital music that may be floating out on the vast Internet.
Another concern: the size of the database.
Right now, Philips has managed to create a database that contains fingerprints of only about 300,000 songs.
But according to the Recording Industry Association of America, there are some 10 to 13 million copyrighted works in the United States alone.
And growing the Philips database to that size will take time and may affect performance.
Still, even Philips recognizes that ending the "Name That Tune" game won't happen overnight.
Ellen de Vries, a spokeswoman for Philips, says that the company is in talks with cellular phone service providers about further development of its song ID system.
But consumers most likely won't see a service using it until 2003 maybe.
"It's a very early thing," she says.
Three ships two American and one
Australian and helicopters are involved in a Navy search, but U.S. officials say privately they are not optimistic.
Early this morning local time, a team of eight U.S. sailors from the destroyer USS Peterson boarded a ship flying the flag of the United Arab Emirates that was suspected of smuggling Iraqi oil.
The tanker immediately sank.
Two of those who were part of the American boarding party are now missing, the Navy says, apparently swept down with the sinking tanker.
Ten of the apparently Iraqi crew of 14 were rescued, but a tanker crew member believed swept under with the missing Americans has been found dead. 
The USS Peterson was in the Gulf enforcing United Nations sanctions against Iraq, and it was believed the sunken ship carried 1,900 tons of Iraqi oil in violation of those sanctions.
"This is one of many tankers that we seize and confiscate and apparantly was very rusty," Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz said on CBS' Face the Nation .
"It started sinking, and we put people on board to figure out what was happening.
I don't think it's more than that, but we'll know later.
"It is a reminder that at the same time we're conducting a war in Afghanistan, we have military engaged in Bosnia and Kosovo and Iraq and Korea," Wolfowitz added.
"The world remains a dangerous place, not just in Afghanistan." ' John McWethy and Andy Field in Washington contributed to this report.
New research out of Oregon State University shows that the mighty blue whale, because of its immense size, has to feed almost constantly just to stay alive.
That's quite different from other whales, like the grays and the humpbacks, that can go for months without food.
As soon as the blue whale has finished slurping up krill at one nutrient-rich area, it races off in search of another meal, because it can't afford to lose any time in its battle for survival.
That desperate search for the maritime equivalent of fast food joints is just one of the findings from an ambitious, multi-year study of the blue whale conducted by Bruce Mate, director of the Marine Mammal Program at OSU.
The findings add a little more to our understanding of a magnificent beast that has just barely survived the fierce appetite of its hungriest predators humans.
The blue whale, which can reach lengths of 100 feet, was nearly hunted to extinction before it received international protection.
It's numbers have dropped from about 186,000 prior to human exploitation, to an estimated 7,000 to 8,000 "true blues" worldwide today.
And it's not out of trouble yet.
"People sometimes tell me they want to come back in the next life as a whale," Mate says.
"I tell them they better be prepared to work hard."
For the blue whale, Mate says, the search for food never ends, and there's always the threat of killer whales which have been known to attack a blue whale, many times their size, and bite off chunks of flesh until the whale dies.
Mate has been a lot closer to blue whales than most experts, because his research required him to inject a small dart, about the size of a human finger, into the side of blue whales while they were gorging on krill.
He had to guide his boat to within about 10 to 15 feet to dart the animals, and he says the process didn't even interrupt their meals.
"They don't even seem to be aware of it," he says.
In all, Mate has tagged 100 blue whales, mostly off the coast of California.
Each tag contains a tiny transmitter which sends data back to Mate via the Argos satellite system.
What came out of all that was a treasure chest of data on animals that we really know very little about.
Some of the tags transmitted data for four or five months before their batteries died, giving information about travel speed, location, and feeding habits.
"We tracked one blue whale for 307 days before the batteries were exhausted," Mate says.
"That provides a lot of data."
The data shows that blues live a very different lifestyle from other whales.
"Unlike gray whales, where the whole population does basically the same thing in a four to six week period of migrating south (to their mating area) the blue whales are much more individualistic in their decisions about where they go and when they do what," he says.
For example, two blue whales tagged while feeding off Southern California remained in the same area for two weeks, and then both took off in nearly opposite directions.
Gray whales hang together, and they go without eating for months at a time when heading south to mate, and then while swimming to their feeding grounds in the North Pacific.
Blues dine almost exclusively on krill, small crustaceans that are only about an inch-and-a-half long.
"So it takes a lot of them" to fill the belly of a blue whale, Mate says.
He estimates that a blue whale might go through as much as three tons of krill in a single day.
Then it's off to the next area, where surface winds whip up the surf, causing an "upwelling" of nutrient-rich waters from far below the surface.
The upwelling brings the nutrients up so that blue whales can crash through the krill, their mouths wide open, scooping up thousands of the small critters in a single pass.
The blues don't waste any time getting to the next upwelling, Mate says.
He has seen them cruising along at about 20 miles an hour, or even faster if there's a pod of killer whales in the area.
In recent years, he says, there has been a surprisingly large number of blues off the Santa Barbara Channel in Southern California, apparently because of the El Ni o.
Although we associate El Ni o with a warming of the Pacific Ocean, its effect in some areas is quite different.
The numbers surged at the west end of the channel during the El Ni o of 1992, and scientists think El Ni o generated local winds that caused an increase in the upwelling, thus providing more food for the blues.
And during the strong El Ni o of 1998, Mate says most of the blue whales he saw were "visibly emaciated," suggesting that shifting winds reduced the upwelling in many traditional feeding grounds, thus depriving the whales of the fat they need to get through the lean periods.
Mate's research has added a few more facts to the story of the blue whales, but he's the first to admit that there are huge gaps in our understanding of these magnificent beasts.
Half the year, he says, nobody even knows where they are.
He plans to keep trying, he says, to fill those gaps.
"These animals are just awe inspiring," he says.
"And if I ever stop being awestruck and inspired by them, I'll move on to another field."
Lee Dye s column appears weekly on ABCNEWS.com.
A former science writer for the Los Angeles Times , he now lives in Juneau, Alaska.
W A S H
I
N G
T O N, Nov. 14
All of the money raised by a Red Cross fund set up after the terror attacks will now go to the victims and their families.
Controversy surrounded the Red Cross Liberty Disaster Fund after it was revealed some of the money would be used to prepare for possible future attacks.
The chairman of the board of the American Red Cross says donors have since indicated they want all the funds directed toward people affected by the Sept. 11 attacks.
David McLaughlin told reporters today there was a "significant gap" between Red Cross efforts and what the American people wanted.
McLaughlin said it's taken the agency longer than it should have to make what he calls a "course correction."
The agency says it will provide a full year of basic living expenses for victims.
It also says it will suspend further fund raising for the Liberty Fund.
The fund has raised more than a half-billion dollars. 
L E X
I N G T O N, N.C., Nov. 14
A North Carolina sheriff's idea of Christmas cheer isn't going over too well in the Muslim community.
The Davidson County sheriff's personal Christmas cards this year show him in front of a desert background holding the severed head of Osama bin Laden in one hand and a bloody sword in the other.
The greeting reads, "Happy Ramadan!!
Merry Christmas and Happy Holidays!
Sheriff Gerald K. Hege."
Hege says he paid for the cards with his own money and will mail them to his friends, family and fellow sheriffs.
Some Muslims say they're insulted by card and the sheriff's reference to Ramadan, one of Islam's most sacred times.
Muslims observe the 30-day period by fasting from sunrise to sunset. 
W A S H
I
N G
T O N, Nov. 14
The Bush administration plans a major restructuring of the Immigration and Naturalization Service that would separate law enforcement and service duties.
The move would fulfill a campaign pledge by President Bush to reduce the long waits endured by people who apply for benefits such as naturalization or permanent residency.
It also seeks to address deficiencies in how the INS tracks foreigners who enter the country.
Thirteen of the 19 hijackers in the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks entered the United States legally, but no entry records exist for the other six.
Commissioner James Ziglar was expected to announce the changes at a news conference.
The restructuring comes as Congress is considering its own plans for remaking the agency, including one that would abolish the INS and create two new agencies.
Critics in Congress say they field more calls from constituents about INS-related problems than other agencies. 
W A S H
I
N G
T O N, Nov. 14
The government says there are still "alarming lapses of security" at the nation's airports.
The Transportation Department's inspector general says there have been about 90 incidents involving poor security practices since Sept. 11.
Kenneth Mead told a Senate panel these have occurred even though tighter controls have been implemented.
Mead says the lapses include the inconsistent use of explosive detection systems to screen checked bags.
He says screeners have also failed to find knives and other dangerous items in carry-on bags.
The hearing comes as congressional negotiators try to craft a compromise aviation security bill.
The main stumbling block continues to be whether airport screeners should be federal workers. 
N E W Y O R K, Nov. 14 Thousands of high school students in the United States and around the world may have to retake their college admissions tests as a result of the anthrax crisis, U.S. education testing officials said Tuesday.
Answer sheets from as many as 7,800 students who took the SAT last month have not yet been received for scoring, said the College Board, the group that owns the SAT.
The College Board says it suspects the delay is due to the shutdown of post offices in New Jersey where anthrax was found.
The delay means some U.S. students as well as others in Saudi Arabia, Germany, Italy, Ghana, Liberia, South Africa and Haiti may have to retake the SAT, a standard test used to help colleges evaluate prospective students.
The New York City-based College Board said it believed the problem was the result of the shutdown of a regional mail processing and distribution center in Hamilton Township, N.J., on Oct. 18 and a post office in Princeton on Oct. 27.
The College Board said it would contact students who took the SAT on Oct. 13 by telephone, e-mail, and priority mail to tell them about the delay.
Students can elect to either register for the next scheduled test on Dec. 1 or take a makeup test at a later date at no additional charge.
They could also get a full refund.
In October, about 550,000 students took the SAT at 3,600 test centers.
"It is highly concentrated, it is pure and the spores are smaller," Homeland Security chief Tom Ridge said today at a White House news conference. 
Those qualities require elaborate equipment to produce and lead to a greater likelihood of the anthrax going airborne and infecting its victims with inhalation anthrax, an often-fatal disease. 
Law enforcement officials told ABCNEWS investigators are narrowing the field of who could have made the highly potent form of bacteria. 
While not ruling out a domestic source, the officials said authorities increasingly believe that someone from a state-sponsored biological warfare program provided either the anthrax itself or advice to those manufacturing it. 
That belief is based, not only on the uniformly small size of the anthrax particles and the purity of the substance, but also on the detection of an additive that keeps the particles from sticking together. 
Only a small handful of countries are known to be able to produce anthrax with those attributes: the United States, Britain, France, Iraq and the former Soviet Union.
A wider group of states are suspected of having the capability, including China, Egypt, India, Israel, Iran, North and South Korea, Pakistan, Taiwan, South Africa, and Syria. 
U.S. officials say no anthrax powder has been produced in this country since the government destroyed the last stockpile in the early 1970s. 
But Ridge refused to comment on the "potential range of actors" who have the capabilities to produce the anthrax. 
The director did, however, confirm that the anthrax in the letter sent to Senate Majority leader Tom Daschle, the anthrax found in letters mailed to NBC News headquarters in New York the New York Post and that discovered at American Media Inc., a tabloid publishing company in Boca Raton, Fla., is all from a strain of bacteria known as the "Ames strain" one that was originally cultivated in Iowa, but used in research laboratories around the world.
ABCNEWS has learned that federal investigators are looking into the backgrounds of anyone who works or recently worked in research facilities that store anthrax and those that have equipment which could be used to grow and process bacteria. 
They are searching for people who have the expertise to produce anthrax-contaminated powder and who may be angry at the government or the media or sympathetic to Islamic extremists.
There are at least 66 facilities that are certified to work with anthrax in the United States, including Los Alamos National Laboratory, Fort Detrick in Maryland, Northern Arizona University and Louisiana State University. 
Officials in Washington announced a new confirmed case of inhalation anthrax today. 
An employee at a facility in Sterling, Va., which handles the State Department's mail is said to be in "guarded" condition after having been hospitalized Wednesday night. 
The source of the infection was not known, but the mail that goes to the Sterling facility is first processed at the Brentwood area facility, where an anthrax-laced letter to Daschle is known to have been processed. 
"This is the first case that we have someone who has been confirmed of a non-postal worker at Brentwood," Postal Service Vice President Deborah Willhite said at a news conference. 
A second employee at the facility at Sterling reported flu-like symptoms tonight and is being evaluated at a hospital.
Officials say 80 other employees at the facility are being tested and given Cipro.
A total of 250-300 employees at state facilities which receive mail from Brentwood are being given Cipro, including two inside the State Department itself.
In addition mail handlers at 220 posts and embassies overseas have been told to start taking Cipro.
Two workers from the Brentwood facility died of inhalation anthrax earlier this week and two others diagnosed with the disease remain in serious, but stable condition. 
Officials have been urging mailroom workers from the roughly 200 private companies and government agencies that receive "mail in bulk" large quantities of mail bundled together for delivery from the Brentwood site to get tested for anthrax. 
That recommendation was prompted by the revelation Wednesday that a letter carrier from a postal facility in Hamilton Township, N.J. likely contracted cutaneous anthrax by handling a letter contaminated by a sorting machine.
The anthrax-laced letters sent to Daschle, NBC News headquarters in New York and the New York Post were all processed at the site. 
Chief D.C. health officer
Dr. Ivan Walks said the worker at the State Department facility reported that he had "never" been to the Brentwood facility. 
Test results are expected to soon determine whether a woman now being treated at Holy Cross Hospital in Silver Spring, Md., has inhalation anthrax, the most serious form of the bacterial infection. 
The patient is a journalist who works on Capitol Hill and was one of many who rushed to Daschle's office in the Hart Senate Office Building last Monday when news broke that a letter containing an anthrax-contaminated powder was opened by the senator's staff. 
Now doctors fear she may have been infected as a result.
Twenty-eight people on Capitol Hill have tested positive for anthrax exposure, but this would be the first case of infection from the incident. 
In addition, in New York today, NBC reported that another employee is suspected of having a possible case of cutaneous anthrax.
Health officials said she also handled the letter that was the source of the anthrax exposure at NBC and that she is on antiobiotics and back at work. 
Daschle said today that anthrax spores have been found in two new areas of the Hart building in the air conditioning duct on the ninth floor and in a stairwell leading from the eighth to the ninth floor. 
The disclosure comes a day after Capitol Police announced that traces of anthrax were detected in a first-floor freight elevator bank located in the southwest quadrant of the building.
The elevators were likely used to deliver the letter to Daschle's offices on the fifth and sixth floors, but authorities have not ruled out the possibility that a second tainted letter could be involved. 
Earlier sweeps by hazardous materials officials turned up traces of anthrax in the mailroom of the Dirksen Senate Office Building and at a mail-processing facility outside the Capitol Hill complex, where the Daschle letter likely passed through, as well as in the mailroom at the Ford building, where only House mail is known to be processed. 
Three of the half-dozen congressional office buildings across the street from the Capitol building reopened this week after being shut down last Wednesday for testing and decontamination.
Officials hope to open the Dirksen building on Friday.
In addition, six truckloads of mail for the White House and Congress were shipped to Ohio today so they could be put through e-beam technology designed to kill anthrax. 
ABCNEWS has learned that some federal investigators now believe the author of the three anthrax-laced letters sent to Capitol Hill, NBC News headquarters in New York and the New York Post is a U.S. citizen, someone who has lived in the United States for a considerable length of time or someone who has studied American culture. 
Some agents point out that all three handwritten letters were dated "09-11-01," with the month preceding the day the way Americans, but not Europeans or Arabs, typically write dates. 
And the fact that one letter was sent to the Post , a largely regional newspaper, suggests the person responsible was very familiar with the Northeast and American culture. 
Even the message, "Death to America.
Death to Israel.
Allah is great," which all three letters contained, may be misleading. 
"I think the phrases are indicative that they are trying to divert our attention to make us look at a foreign organization, to make us look at al Qaeda (Osama bin Laden's terrorist network)," said ABCNEWS counterterrorism expert Vince Cannistraro, "but that they are trying to obscure the real origin, which appears to be domestic."
Friends at a small, private airstrip in this Swiss town say Luigi Fasulo, 67, was in good spirits when he took off Thursday afternoon, and none believe he would have killed himself.
Milan's Chief Prosecutor Gerard D'Ambrosio also said suicide was the least likely scenario.
But the pilot's son told an Italian newspaper he may have taken his life because he was distraught over financial troubles.
The crash killed Fasulo and two government lawyers inside the landmark Pirelli building, and sparked fears of another Sept. 11-type attack.
Italian officials ruled out terrorism but were searching for other explanations and opened an investigation into the pilot, his health, family situation and finances as a start.
Fasulo's friends in Locarno remembered the 67-year-old as a bon vivant, always joking, always in motion and always with another project in the can.
And Thursday was no exception. "
He was perfectly normal, jovial as usual," said Pino Scossa, a friend of 40 years who runs the mechanics shop at the airstrip and spoke to Fasulo just before he took off for the short hop to Milan.
"Suicide is out of the question."
Like others at the Magadino airport, director Sandro Balestra described Fasulo as an excellent pilot with more 5,000 hours of flight time in over 30 years.
Yet Balestra confirmed stories of mishaps.
Fasulo, who at one time ran an air taxi service flying VIPS around Europe, once ran out of fuel as he approached the Zurich airport, missing the runway by more than a mile.
Another time, under similar circumstances, he landed in a potato field.
After the Zurich incident, which occurred over a decade ago, Fasulo temporarily lost his pilot's license and had to take a test to have it reissued, Balestra said.
Fasulo gave up the taxi business and no longer had the necessary license to fly with instruments, and on Thursday was flying just by sight.
'Out of' ...
Luck?
The mishaps earned Fasulo the nicknames "Cowboy of the Air" and "Out of Oil."
But friends claimed those days were long past, and that as he aged, Fasulo had become more cautious.
They said they had never heard him speak of financial difficulties.
But there was some evidence to support such claims by his son, wife and other friends in the Italian media.
One of Fasulo's companies Playmatic SA was listed in the 2002 Swiss company directory as being bankrupt.
A sign attached to Fasulo's mailbox in the lobby of the modest apartment building in Lugano where he lived indicated another company, Eurotex Corp. Panama.
There was also an address for a third firm, Avioservizi SA of Chiasso, which also was listed in the 2002 directory.
Fasulo's wife, Filomena, told Radio Capital that Italians owed the family money. "
These delinquents ruined us," she said, without identifying them. "
Instead of paying us, they gave us bills for collection which aren't worth anything."
Officials at the Magadino airport, where Fasulo paid $18,000 a year to park his plane, said he had been trying to sell the 1976 Rockwell Commander 112TC for about a year, asking $70,000.
They claimed, however, the sale wasn't to ease his financial problems but that he intended to buy a newer model.
Fasulo had owned the plane for about 10 years, said mechanic Stefano Scossa.
It was last checked at another airport in February and was in good mechanical condition, Scossa said.
"But things break down.
Anything could have happened," Scossa said.
Air traffic controllers in Milan said Fasulo reported trouble with the landing gear as he approached the runway, and the tower told him to fly west until the problem was fixed.
He veered off course, and a few minutes later, at 5:47 p.m., his twin-engine plane punched into the slim, 30-story Pirelli building, officials said.
D'Ambrosio said prosecutors were working with three hypotheses about the cause: that it was a technical problem, or that Fasulo fell ill or committed suicide.
The prosecutor handling the case, Bruna Albertini, noted the suicide theory was based solely on the comments of Fasulo's son, Marco Fasulo, in the Rome daily La Repubblica .
The son a pilot for the airline Swiss was quoted Friday as saying it might have been a suicide induced by despair over financial problems.
"It was a suicide, a suicide, do you understand?
" he was quoted as saying.
"They wanted to cheat him, knock him down economically, and he killed himself.
"
Italian Transport Minister Pietro Lunardi, in a briefing today in the Senate, said the pilot could have fallen ill at the controls.
After making initial radio contact, "there was silence, he was not operating any of the plane's controls in the last two minutes," he said.
"There's every reason to think there was something strange the kind of target and the way it was hit straight on is spooky," he said.
If mechanical error was to blame, Fasulo may have gotten distracted trying to release the landing gear manually, Scossa said.
Milan police officials headed across the border to Switzerland to coordinate with authorities there, the news agency ANSA said.
Swiss prosecutors in Tessin canton launched their own investigation as well.
The impact of the crash, which occurred after most workers had left for the day, gutted the 25th and 26th floors of the tower.
Postal workers are taking it in increasing numbers.
Supreme Court employees have been issued a six-day supply.
The antibiotic doxycycline is emerging as an anti-anthrax drug of choice in the U.S. war on bioterrorism. 
Health officials in the District of Columbia - an anthrax hot spot - say doxycycline is cheaper than the better-known anti-anthrax drug Cipro, has fewer side effects and is just as effective.
They also say that unlike Cipro, doxycycline (pronounced dawk-see-SY'-kleen) is available in abundance. 
The federal government plans to make the antibiotic an important tool in its bioterror arsenal.
Generic drugmaker Ivax Corp. is supplying the government with more than 1.2 billion tablets of doxycycline as federal health officials build a national stockpile of drugs to treat anthrax. 
The small, Miami-based company to sell the generic drug for about 3 cents per tablet to the government.
In contrast, German drugmaker Bayer AG, the maker of Cipro, said it plans to sell Cipro to the government for 95 cents per tablet. 
U.S. Health and Human Services
Secretary Tommy Thompson has said the government aims to compile enough anthrax treatments to treat 12 million people over a 60-day period.
Many antibiotics are taken twice per day, meaning at least 1.44 billion pills would be needed for the stockpile. 
Ivaxc isn't the only drug maker eager to produce anti-anthrax medications. 
Health-care giant Johnson & Johnson has offered the government 100 million tablets of its antibiotic Levaquin, which it hopes to have approved to treat anthrax. 
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. offered to give anyone with a confirmed anthrax infection or exposure to anthrax no-cost supplies of antibiotic Tequin.
Eli Lilly and Co., Pfizer Inc., Abbott Laboratories and Pharmacia have all made similar announcements about testing or supplying antibiotics. 
Both Levaquin and Tequin are in the class of antibiotics known as quinolones, the same type as Cipro.
Doxycycline is among the class of antibiotics known as tetracyclines. 
Health experts said the government could stockpile drugs from a few categories of antibiotics, as each causes different side effects. 
Ivax also said on Friday that it has an application pending with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for ciprofloxacin, the generic equivalent of Cipro. 
A handful of companies have tentative approvals to market copycats of Cipro, but Bayer has U.S. patent protection over the drug until late 2003.
A chilly coda to the U.S.-China spy plane flap. 
Rejecting Beijing's demand for $1 million in costs, the United States is sending China $34,567 to pay for support of the crippled U.S. Navy spy plane that collided with a Chinese fighter jet in April, U.S. officials said. 
The officials, who asked not to be identified, said there was no word yet on whether China would accept the payment, which was en route to the U.S. Embassy in Beijing for transmission to the Chinese Foreign Ministry. 
Navy Rear.
Adm. Craig Quigley, a Defense Department spokesman, told reporters at the Pentagon's regular briefing the payment was being sent to the Chinese, but he declined to discuss the amount.
Quigley said the U.S. received a bill from China, and that some of the charges were legitimate. 
The crippled U.S. Navy EP-3 reconnaissance plane landed on China's Hainan Island on April 1 after colliding with a fighter jet in international air space.
It did not leave a military airfield there until July 3 when it was dismantled and flown back to the United States for repairs. 
China held the 24-member EP-3 crew for 11 days after the collision in a standoff that roiled U.S.-China relations in the first months of the administration of President Bush.
Michael Skupin has learned the truest sense of the word "survivor".
Along with his wife Peni, his 3-year old child Emily and four other travelers, Skupin, who had just recovered from severe burns he received on "Survivor: The Australian Outback," walked away from a plane crash on the shores of Lake Michigan on Sept. 24. 
Alive and well, he talks with The Early Show about his experience.
The Skupins were returning from a weekend Michigan Republican conference on board a twin-engine Seneca.
The pilot, Randolf Rice, radioed that the plane was low on fuel and he was planning on touching down at nearby Pellston airport.
A short time later, Rice radioed again, saying that he had lost an engine. 
Skupin said they were at 6,000 feet when he learned of the engine problems.
"I just prayed," he said.
"I didn't know what else to do, so I prayed with my family." 
Skupin had been taking flying lessons from the pilot, but said he was not at the controls during this flight.
"I can only fly a single engine, this is a dual engine turbo-prop," Skupin said.
The pilot, his wife and two children were the other people on board. 
"He (Rice) was looking for a place to put it down, " Skupin said.
"There was a crowded roadway, a rocky shoreline or the water." 
The plane crashed into the beach and flipped over.
Skupin couldn't believe everyone made it out safely.
"I looked at the space that was the cockpit and couldn't believe we were in there.
The rescue people couldn't believe it either." 
Peni Skupin is five months pregnant and went into labor after the crash.
According to Skupin, the contractions stopped soon after she arrived at the hospital and she is doing well now.
Despite denying any link to the terror attacks in the United States, Iraq considers itself a possible target in the American campaign against terrorism, the Iraqi vice president said. 
At the opening of the 13th
Babylon International Festival, Taha Yassin Ramadan told reporters Saturday night that Iraq is not related in any way to the Sept. 11 attacks on New York and Washington and he accused America of only using force to impose its will upon others. 
"Everything is possible.
Yet this is not a new matter to Iraq, which faced ... a more stronger campaign led by the United States 11 years ago."
But, he added, "We are confident that America is heading to its end." 
In Jordan, Arab League Secretary-General Amr Moussa said Arab countries were opposed to any strikes against Iraq.
He said such an attack would "topple the balance of power" in the region, and that the U.S. quest to combat terrorism had to be carried out in consultation with Arab countries. 
U.S. officials have said there was no overwhelming evidence at this point that Iraq was linked to the attack, but others have said that angle should be investigated. 
Asked whether the United States should go after Iraq, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld on CBS's Face the Nation would only say, "I think the president has a set of decisions and calculations he has to make." 
Washington is strengthening its already formidable Gulf arsenal, sending more than 100 aircraft, positioning naval ships and calling up thousands of troops for an imminent strike against those it considers responsible for the recent terror attacks in the United States that left more than 6,000 people dead or missing. 
Rumsfeld said the United States was receiving help from countries and individuals that in some instances were "surprising" and that would be key to the outcome. 
Since 1991, U.S. and British planes have patrolled Iraqi skies to enforce no-fly zones, using bases in the Gulf and Turkey to launch sorties against Iraqi military installations.
Such bases are expected to figure in a likely U.S.-led campaign against Taliban-controlled Afghanistan, which harbors exiled Saudi dissident and prime suspect in the U.S. attacks, Osama bin Laden. 
The United States considers Iraq, which remains shackled by economic sanctions 11 years after the Gulf War, a state sponsor of terrorism. 
Thousands of Iraqis celebrated the opening of the annual Babylon festival held among the ancient city's ruins, about 62 miles south of Baghdad.
Performers from 34 countries are participating. 
Iraqi dancers performed in colorful costumes to folkloric music.
The lyrics of the festival's opening number, taken from works by famed poet Abdel Razzaq Abdel Wahid, praised the leadership of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein, comparing him to ancient victorious kings. 
Can Reality TV Survive Terrorism? 
All the world is not a stage.
It's a playing field. 
Life isn't the drama that Shakespeare envisioned.
It's a game. 
These things come to mind with the kickoff of Survivor:
Africa, the third of CBS' back-to-nature tourneys.
It premieres Thursday at 8 p.m. ET. 
You know the game plan:
Sixteen players are stranded (under the watchful eye of scores of production people) in some picturesque but rugged environment this time, Kenya's Shaba National Reserve. 
Then whoever is able to Outwit, Outplay, Outlast the 15 others comes away the winner. 
But are viewers really in the mood?
The nation is still reeling from the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks and jumpy at the prospect of more.
The economy is shaky.
There's a war going on. 
Is Survivor
a game viewers still care about now, in the early stages of a deadly serious game the news channels like to call America Strikes Back ? 
Unsurprisingly, Mark Burnett, the series' creator, believes the audience needs a little respite.
I'm a viewer, too, he told reporters last week.
I'm totally in the mood for escapist television. 
So let the game begin as Survivor: Africa joins other prime-time reality TV like ABC's The Mole 2, CBS' The Amazing Race and Fox's Love Cruise. 
Who will Outwit, Outplay, Outlast this time?
Will it be Jessie Camacho, the deputy sheriff from Orlando, Fla.?
Tom Buchanan, the goat farmer from Rich Valley, Va.?
Clarence Black, the basketball coach from Detroit? 
They and their Survivor rivals come from ordinary backgrounds.
These rough-and-ready volunteers are just like you at least, those of you who happen to be super-fit, wildly competitive, and in a position to blow off your families and jobs for several weeks of isolation that millions of viewers will see. 
That's reality TV: a further blurring of the once-sacrosanct dividing line between spectators and players. 
Once upon a time, TV presented life to its viewers as a spectator sport.
In that simpler era, you were happy with your designated role as couch potato idle, passive, transfixed by the screen. 
Maybe this cozy arrangement was first disrupted by talk TV, which invited viewers to strut their stuff (and parade their pathologies) while fellow viewers looked on. 
The new rules were clear:
Leave the stands and storm the field.
Presto!
You're a player!
At least, until the next commercial break. 
Meanwhile, TV shows and networks were urging viewers to tell us what YOU think.
Don't just sit there, say something!
Phone in!
Log on!
With nothing more to recommend yourself than a telephone line, you could get in the game. 
Of course, Survivor demands far more from its players than armchair punditry.
You have to leave your living room.
You even have to leave the country. 
You have to spend a month outdoors with other scheming people.
You have to endure physical challenges and inclement weather.
You don't get enough to eat.
And then they dare you to eat bugs or animal brains. 
What do you get for your pains?
A million bucks in cash if you're the winner and, for all concerned, priceless attention. 
The roster for Survivor: Africa was announced with great fanfare two weeks ago.
Then the players were introduced last Thursday through their audition-tape clips on Survivor: Countdown to Africa, which host Jeff Probst called an insider's guide: how to watch, whom to watch and what to watch for. 
The game viewers will watch starting this week is a done deal.
Survivor:
Africa has already been played.
Now the footage will be packaged as an adventure narrative and parceled out to viewers in weekly installments. 
Are viewers ready to embrace Survivor: Africa as they did its predecessors?
Currently, a life-and-death challenge grips the United States, changing by the day and consuming everyone.
In this uncertain new age, when victory against terrorists would seem as hard to achieve as it is to define, how will a formulaic contest like Survivor fare with viewers? 
Maybe they're back, but has their moment passed them by?
Survivor is for people who are looking for trouble, the more frivolous the better. 
But now, deadly trouble dominates the eye.
There's a chilling game afoot with an undetermined outcome.
Everyone is watching.
And, one way or another, everybody plays. 
Written By FRAZIER MOORE, AP TV Writer ?
MMI
The Associated Press.
All Rights Reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
Eight years ago, filmmaker Ric Burns set out to uncover the story behind the construction of New York City's famous skyline. 
The final episodes of the resulting 400-year history, "New York:
A Documentary Film," were ready to air when two hijacked jetliners struck the World Trade Center towers, changing the skyline forever. 
Watching the film now, "you see things which feel like foreshadowings," Burns said.
"Every crucial theme that has come up in the course of the city's history is at play in the events of September 11." 
The last two installments, which will air as originally planned on PBS Sunday and Monday, detail another period in the city's history when it faced challenges that seemed insurmountable - the social turmoil of the post-World War II period and New York's fiscal crisis of the 1970s. 
"The message, of course, is that the city is simply too strong, too resilient, too important," Burns said.
"Of course, it's going to recover." 
Burns made no changes to the film, though he revised the ending credits.
Instead of irreverent commentary from writers Fran Lebowitz, Brendan Gill and Spalding Gray, there will be sober reflections about New York's role as a global capital, he said. 
He also plans an eighth installment looking at the impact and meaning of the World Trade Center tragedy. 
"It seems inevitable now that we've lurched unexpectedly and so horribly into a new phase of the city's history that we reconvene the experts," he said. 
Though New York has faced tragedies before, Burns said there has been nothing in its history on the scale of the World Trade Center devastation. 
"The only way the past helps us deal with it is that New York is so experienced in dealing with unprecedented events," said Burns.
"It's been on the cutting edge of creation of a modern global culture for hundreds of years, and what that has meant is that problems tend to happen here first." 
Younger brother of filmmaker Ken Burns, Ric Burns caught the filmmaking bug when his brother asked him to work on the 1990 documentary, "The Civil War." 
More than 20 million viewers watched the first five parts of "New York: A Documentary Film" when it first aired on PBS in the fall of 1999. 
"New York has always had this sense that the sky's the limit," Burns said.
"That tremendous, overarching ambition has sponsored some of the greatest things about the city and also brought us face to face with calamity. ...
If you reach that high you're exposed that much more in many more ways.
" 
Burns' documentary does not shrink from the dark side of the city's history, from colonial slavery to bloody Civil War draft riots and the 1911 Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire that claimed 146 lives. 
The city survived past civic tragedies because people recognized their common bonds, Burns said.
After the Triangle Shirtwaist factory fire, for example, New Yorkers came together in an extraordinary consensus and approved government controls on workplace conditions. 
"What's been not at all surprising but so moving to see was that happened virtually instantaneously" after the World Trade Center attack, he said.
"As a terrorist attack, it's been unsuccessful, absolutely, in its principal aim.
It's not brought us down, it's expanded the community and level of emotional commitment." 
The twin towers had few fans when they were under construction, he said. 
"They came at the tail end of a big building boom in American history, and people were getting tired of it," he said.
Sentiment changed once they were completed, though. 
"That skyline is the most well known image in the world," said Burns.
"Those buildings, the skyline and the culture the they stand for are really the possessions of a worldwide constituency." 
CBS: Why do you want to go to space? 
TITO:
It's something I've wanted to do since I was a teenager.
And you have a dream that you establish early in your life, it's hard to let go of it.
I've been interested in space interested enough that I went to university and ended up getting both a bachelors and a masters degree in aerospace engineering.
I worked at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory for five years.
That was really the beginning of my career, though it's just a continuation of one's original dream. 
CBS: It's a huge leap, though, between doing the math and plotting things on paper and actually getting out there and putting your own life on the line, really.
What is it that fascinates you?
What do you want to see? 
TITO:
When you actually design trajectories, as I did, you have to visualize your spacecraft and visualize the planet that you're orbiting in my case, it was planet Mars and Venus.
You have to identify with what you're seeing when you design the mission.
So by actually going into space, it's really just living out what I'd worked on for so many years. 
CBS: What are you hoping to pioneer up there, because you are one of a kind the only one of your kind in a way.
What do you think you're doing in a larger context? 
TITO:
Originally, it was just a desire to go into space.
And I really I think didn't understand the broader implications.
And over the last nine months, I realized that it is something unique and pioneering.
I'm actually getting more and more excited about the future as far as opening up space to private citizens, developing the enthusiasm for other people to follow in my footsteps, and open up space to the general public. 
CBS: Cost is a huge factor.
You're lucky enough to be able to afford it and be the first.
How do you think the cost of space tourism might be brought down so that people like me might be able to afford it? 
TITO:
I don't know exactly what you can afford, but there are a lot of people around the world who could afford this flight at the current price if they were willing to put in the time and the effort.
I have a feeling that the amount of training that's required to do this is more of a barrier than the cost.
But I think that the cost will come down as the demand increases that there will be market forces that will develop vehicles that will be able to launch multiple numbers of people.
And the cost per person will be a lot less. 
CBS: How do you think America sees you as just some rich guy who is freeloading off the poor Russians who don't have enough money to run their space program? 
TITO:
Well, the Russians have flown "guest cosmonauts" ever since the 1980s.
I think as far as freeloading, I think I'm paying my way.
So I think it's just a continuation of a policy that they have had.
If you look back at the early days of powered flight, the wealthy people were the ones who could afford to go in an airplane 80, 90 years ago.
It was that interest that ultimately led to the development of commercial aviation, where everyone could afford it.
Now it might be another 50 or 80 years before it gets down to a reasonable price.
But that's how it starts. 
CBS: How do you think the American people see you? 
TITO:
Well, I've seen some polls, and a poll that included about 25,000 people had over 80 percent supporting my flight.
So that's a pretty good number.
So I would say on the basis of that positively. 
CBS:
Something I've read about you said you had even considered designing a spacecraft a space shuttle that would take other people into space.
Are you serious about that? 
TITO:
Well I looked at that, and it wasn't an idea to put people in orbit, because that is a much more complicated engineering effort.
But I was looking at the possibility of developing a sub-orbital vehicle that might go up about 62 miles, which is the official height to be in space, and allow someone to be weightless for about five minutes, and then come down a much less ambitious flight than orbit.
But as I studied that, I found out that the costs involved and the complexity involved was much greater than I thought.
So I think an effort like that will require a lot more money and a lot more engineering.
I'm less enthusiastic about that possibility than I was when I first looked at it. 
CBS: Why do you think NASA and the other International Space Station partners are so reluctant to let you go into space? 
TITO:
I don't know.
It seems like maybe they are looking at it the wrong way.
Maybe they are concerned about a Challenger-type tragedy.
If they were to look at it from the standpoint of the positive reaction that is developing by the American public or the people throughout the world for space and the International Space Station, I think they would see that it's really a plus for them
it's really a positive.
And I don't really understand why they're not seeing this. 
CBS: How much of it has to do not so much with you, whether you are fit or trained, but just with a pretty naked power struggle: who gets to call the shot on how things are done on the ISS? 
TITO:
I am pretty sure that that is a factor, but that is something that is out of my area, and that that thing will resolve itself. 
CBS: You must have thought a lot on what is going on, because you what to make things go as smoothly as possible, what is your reading on how much solidarity there is in NASA against your going, or is it as controversial there as it is among the public? 
TITO:
I don't think there is solidarity in NASA against my going
, I've met a lot of people from NASA
the have been very supportive, a lot of people here in Star City, astronauts that I know and talk to American astronauts.
I think it might be a problem at the top level more than it is across NASA
, I heard that the younger people are much more enthusiastic seeing me fly, because there is more of a possibility for themselves in future years to be able to do the same. 
CBS: What is it at the top of NASA? 
TITO:
As I said I don't understand If I were a NASA administrator I would be enthusiastic about this flight, and I would take full advantage of it
I just don't understand why they don't look at the positive side, particularly at a period when the budgets are being cut and there is really a lack of enthusiasm among the Americans about space, and here is an opportunity to get things going. 
CBS: How real are their alleged fears that you are not ready to go to the ISS at this stage, when there is a lot of work still to do? 
CBS: I was interested to see that the crew aboard the ISS at the moment seemed quite happy for you to come. 
TITO:
I felt very good about that; it was nice to hear about that.
In fact a couple of days ago I was at Mission Control and had an opportunity to talk on the radio to the crew of the ISS
and I thanked them for that statement,
it was a warm encouraging for me. 
CBS: You think the will be in trouble with NASA? 
TITO:
Actually I think the NASA gave them to go ahead to welcome me, that is my feeling. 
CBS: Why, that is a weird mixed signal, isn't it? 
TITO:
Remember that the problems that NASA had are several weeks old and I think that things have probably shifted since then, I haven't heard anything negative from NASA for several weeks now. 
CBS: Do you get the impression that they are actually in favor of you going now? 
TITO:
I think that since the Houston incident they have learned more about my training and my physical fitness and my medical condition.
And I think now they better understand of what the Russians are talking about when the Russians say that I am qualified. 
CBS: What did you miss when you didn't participate at Johnson Space Center that week, what did you not do? 
TITO:
well.
It is hard to say since I was not there
but my crewmates ended up in getting some sorts of briefings, it wasn't (extensive) in terms of training, but as I see it I will not spend as much time if any in the American segment, because most of the time I will spend in the Russian segment where the habitation module is. 
CBS: So you don't feel compromised in any way having to miss that week? 
TITO:
No, not at all.
And if there is any training that is needed we can do it on orbit. 
CBS: What has your training being like? 
TITO:
It's been an experience for me it was a great experience.
In the beginning it was a culture shock living a very nice life style in Los Angeles and then coming to Star City and moving into a small, two-room apartment, having to make my own bed, cook my own food
it was a change.
Not that I haven't done this before, because I was in college, when I was young
I lived that way
it was really a return to my youth, which took a little bit of adjustment, but I got into the swing of things, I really started to enjoy it.
Training itself has a lot of aspects to it, training in classroom, simulations, physical training it is really an experience.
And I've learned so much in the last eight months, probably more than in the last twenty years.
This is something brand new, I enjoy it. 
CBS: Avionics, engineering and space engineering in general must have gone a long way since you left the business? 
TITO:
Not really.
These vehicles were designed thirty years ago and there was really nothing really new except I had worked on the unmanned program and this gave an opportunity to understand how a manned space vehicle operates, but the technology is really old technology and as far as my engineering training, it fit right in when I learned. 
CBS: When you graduated did you use calculators or slide rules? 
TITO: I graduated before the calculator, we had slide roles. 
CBS: Well this has changed..
Actually in Russia they still use slide rules, don't they? 
TITO:
really?
I haven't seen any. 
CBS: Even at Mission Control they do occasionally. 
TITO:
I have my slide rules somewhere in the closet at home, I have to dig that out. 
CBS: You should have one of these pockets on your suit. 
TITO:
No, you wear it on your belt.
Everyone used to wear it on the belt. 
CBS: What about the physical aspects of training?
You must have to do all the things that we have seen on video. 
TITO:
Actually, that was the easiest part.
I've been running for the last twenty years, I've been weightlifting for the last five years, so my regular routine has been very heavy in terms of physical training, so what I am experiencing here at Star City is pretty much the same.
I go out running and what interested me most is that I couldn't find anyone else running, and I thought there would be a lot of people running in the morning, but they don't run as much in Russia as they do in California. 
CBS: What was the hardest part of the whole program? 
TITO:
The hardest part was dealing with the uncertainty of whether I was going to fly or not.
And this uncertainty began almost on day one, because I arrived here in August, and there was talk at that time about whether MIR would continue and whether the funding be available, so I had to live with that.
And then when it started to look like MIR was not going to continue they had still scheduled their mission in January
and I was trained for that mission with the idea that possibly it might be the last mission and then it looked more and more like that wasn't going to happen, but I had to keep pressing towards my goal
and I think that was the most difficult: to just continue on, not get discouraged and pack my bags and go home.
To say: look, if there is any possibility that I can fly I am going to realize it and I am not going to give up and then the ISS opportunity was first presented to me in November and that was four or five months ago, and looked like a reach at that time, but I kept pushing for that as I saw that MIR was going to be de-orbited. 
CBS: Was that a strange bonus in a way?
When we were talking earlier you referred to MIR as an old person who had to go.
Do you feel as if you've been handed a bonus in not being sent to MIR but being sent to the ISS? 
TITO:
Absolutely.
It is night and day.
I don't think I realized when I signed up for MIR what condition it really was in and what it would've been like spending a week or two on board of MIR, so I am very fortunate that I didn't truly understand that and ended up going to the ISS. 
CBS: How much did you pay the Russians for this voyage? 
TITO:
It is a question I never answer, it is confidential and it is written into the contract that we don't disclose any financial arrangements, so I have to decline. 
CBS: Why do they keep it secret? 
TITO: You will have to ask the people who wrote the contract. 
CBS: Did you ever felt that you are just a means to the Russians, that they really see your wallet more than they see you? 
TITO:
I think that my wallet is a big part of this and when I first arrived they looked at that as the only consideration, but things have changed over the eight months since I first started and at least as I view it, I have developed a very close relationship not only with some of the senior Russian space officials, but also with the crew, the instructors and a wide range of people, and I think they learned to understand what my dream was and began to identify it with me as a human being as opposed to just a wealthy person that wanted to fly in space. 
CBS: Has your contact with the Russians and friendship with then made you feel some of their sadness that their space program has been so reduced and so bruised and has ended up so poor? 
TITO:
Most definitely yes.
Having had my original interest in space spurred by the launching of Sputnik in 1957 and later on the flight of Yuri Gagarin, to see a nation that (was) really a leader in space flight be in a situation when they (have) virtually no space flight, maybe their budget is one percent of the US space budget, and to see these people that are as dedicated as I remember I was back in the days when I worked at NASA, to see them looking at the future not in a positive way. 
CBS: How do you feel, that the realization of this long held dream of yours is taking place in some controversial and in some ways bitter atmosphere? 
TITO:
Well I don't see it as being that controversial..
By the time we launch a lot of that will be forgotten and the enthusiasm that I see existing through the media and through the chat lines that I read on the Internet that will even be more pronounced. 
TITO:
You would've liked to go with NASA's full blasting instead of going with this kind of grudging reluctance to let you go. 
TITO:
I would've expected that NASA would've been enthusiastic
and I think when all is said and done they will benefit by this,
so it doesn't bother me seeing a few senior people at NASA having difficulty with it.
What's important is, that this flight increases the interest in the American people in space and in the international space station, and I know that this would be a plus for NASA, a plus for the ISS, and that what's important to me. 
CBS: You must have run into some grumpy Russian people, too, involved in the space program, who have worked hard in extremely difficult conditions as the country was getting poor and must resent you like hell, because you just got money to buy yourself what they simply couldn't get through hard work and application? 
TITO:
I have not sensed that at all, in fact, what's amazing about Russia being, say a new country in a way, opening its doors to free enterprise, that they look up to people that have been successful, and they look at myself, by and large, as the person that started out without any money, coming from an immigrant family, being successful, on my own.
They look at that as something they admire as I admired when I was young when I saw people that were self-made. 
CBS: We can, though, understand that kind of resentment, perhaps it might be more evident in America, that people might think: "Why should people be able to buy, what is, after all, a privilege that is only accorded to the very few?" 
TITO:
Well, there are people that are envious of wealth.
I never was.
I was always actually quite excited seeing somebody being successful
and I just said "maybe I will". 
CBS: How is your Russian? 
TITO:
Terrible. 
CBS: What can you say? 
TITO: "Horosho" O.K. 
CBS:
Well, "spacibo" or thank you Mr. Tito, for speaking with us. 
In her latest Political Points commentary, CBS News Senior Political Editor Dotty Lynch says the Democrats and Republicans are both now looking to co-opt the middle. 
New polls this week suggest that President Bush's numbers are up a bit.
And his political advisors argue that the best way for this to continue is to "talk Democratic." 
On July 8 the Washington Post's Tom Edsall reported that "Republican strategists are warning that the electorate is moving steadily to the left; and that the party needs to adopt new rhetoric and tactics to attract the growing number of working women, Hispanics, secular voters and socially tolerant, well-educated professionals." 
Bush's political advisors say that while he has solidified his base (83 percent of Republicans supported him in the last CBS New /New York Times poll), Independents and Democrats slipped away during the last few months.
Taking back the issue agenda with a discount credit card for prescription drugs for seniors, leaks about policies to overhaul Medicare and Social Security, trying to get a compromise on a Patients Bill of Rights and, of course, keeping up the focus on Hispanics, is the order of the day. 
The last thing the Bushies want is to get bogged down in new culture wars over stem-cell research and faith-based initiatives.
Headlines that the White House was ready to cut a deal with the Salvation Army to allow them skirt workplace rules protecting gays were definitely not in the playbook. 
"If he governed as he campaigned he'd be doing fine," said Sen. Evan Bayh, D-Ind.
"But he's lost the 'com' from compassionate conservative.
He's become a passionate conservative." 
Democrats and Republicans are now engaged in a ritual dance of positioning.
Michael Barone, in the introduction to the Almanac of American Politics 2002, says that that this country is "divided down the middle," 49 percent Republican, 49 percent Democratic in the recent votes for the White House and Congress.
"We haven't had such stasis in successive election results since the 1880s, which was also the last decade when a president was elected despite trailing in the popular vote and the Senate was equally divided." 
Barone also says there are major cultural difference between the two groups, especially in the area of religion. "
One group is observant, tradition-bound and moralistic.
The other is unobservant, liberation-minded, relativistic." 
Both parties are now looking to co-opt the middle the president by embracing some pro-government, traditionally Democratic issues; and centrist Democrats by returning to values and issues like community policing and fatherhood initiatives, and by labeling Bush as a captive of the right wing. 
The Democratic Leadership Council is holding a meeting in Indianapolis, July 15-17, which will include 250 state and local officials who will be "trained in the language of values and ideas" and hear from such national players as Sens.
Joe Leiberman, Hillary Clinton and Tom Daschle.
The DLC says it is concerned about "a cultural problem affecting the Democratic Party" and feels that Gore lost in 2000 because he abandoned the issues of crime and welfare, made some working class people feel the Democrats were hostile to their values, and favored economic redistribution rather than expanded opportunity. 
The other side of their strategy is to try to portray Bush and the Republicans as socially intolerant and captives of the right.
A test of this will come in the New Jersey gubernatorial race where conservative Republican Brett Schundler beat the more moderate Republican Bob Franks and will face DLCer Jim McGreevey in November. 
Schundler, the 42-year-old mayor of heavily Democratic Jersey City, is a darling of the national conservatives and used images of Ronald Reagan in his primary campaign.
Democrats are expected to try to tar him as an extremist, especially on the issues of abortion and gun control, and some Republicans want him to trim his conservative sails for the general election. 
Campaign spokesman Bob Guhl, says Schundler's general election strategy won't change much.
He will continue an "anti-establishment campaign" focusing on the same four issues that won him the primary: lowering property taxes, reforming education, reducing suburban sprawl and removing the tolls from the Garden State Parkway.
Guhl says if he talks about these issues while McGreevey hammers away on abortion and gun control, Schundler will come through as more in touch with the people of New Jersey because he's talking the issues that really matter to them. 
The DLC warns Democrats that they need to frame these social issues in less polarizing ways that won't turn off mainstream voters.
For example, casting abortion as something that should be "safe, legal and rare," rather something that is every woman's right.
Gun control must not imply that gun owners are evil; they suggest using the words "gun safety" rather than "gun control." 
Much of this positioning is rhetoric loaded with boomer jargon.
Reality often has a way of ruining some of the coolest catch phrases.
Despite all of the DLC's efforts, Schundler's rallying cry of ending the tolls on the Garden State Parkway may be more "empowering to the vital center" than fatherhood initiatives and communitarianism.
Forty-five-year-old Garrett Wilson was a modern-day Harold Hill. 
Like the title character in Meredith Wilson s
The Music Man, Garrett Wilson had a charismatic personality that helped him forge a successful career selling musical instruments. 
Vicky Wampler of Frostburg, Md., says he s a wonderful father to their eight-year-old daughter, Marysa. 
"He was just engrossed in raising his daughter.
That was the most important thing in his life," says Wampler, who became Wilson s fourth wife seven years ago. 
Wampler also says she and Wilson had a nearly perfect relationship: "As close to Ozzie and Harriett as any two people could be." 
But in 1998, Wilson was accused of murdering of his own baby son, Garrett Michael in 1987.
Pushing authorities to file charges was Wilson s third wife, Missy Anastasi, the mother of the dead infant. 
"I think that he is a cold-blooded, evil killer," says Montgomery County, Maryland, prosecutor Doug Gansler, who led the case against Wilson.
Gansler says that Wilson told people he hated the baby. 
Which is the real Garrett Wilson?
Peter Van Sant reports. 
John Farley has known Wilson since they were both young children, and they are still best friends. 
"I just can t believe he could have done it," says Farley.
"The Garrett that I know is caring, he s loving."
Farley says that Wilson loved his baby son. 
"If you were meeting with Garrett Wilson for the first time and you looked into his eyes, you wouldn
t see a murderer," says Adrian Havill, a writer who penned "While Innocents Slept
," a detailed look at the case. 
Wampler believes that her husband is innocent.
"You can t be two people- you can t be a murderer one day, and a loving father and a giving person the next day." 
The story begins in 1986, when Wilson and Anastasi married.
A year later, Anastasi gave birth to their son, Garrett Michael.
According to Anastasi, Wilson showed little interest in the baby after he came home from the hospital. 
She chose to dismiss this behavior until early one morning when their baby woke up crying. 
"I jumped up like I always did, to go and feed the baby.
And Garrett literally dissuaded me, talked me out of getting up and going.
He said, I ll do it. .
He didn t ever wake up in the middle of the night and be wide awake, or in the early morning - and this particular morning, he was awake.
" 
She stayed in bed while her husband went into the baby s room. 
"I heard a patting noise over the monitor.
And then the next thing I heard was a (a sigh)
I don
t know what it was, but I know that it wasn t a good sound." 
Alarmed, she hurried out of bed, stopping to feed her two cats.
When she got to the baby, she knew something was wrong.
"I screamed, Garrett, what did you do to him? "
Wilson had gone back to their bedroom. 
"He opened the door, and his face was as white as a sheet.
And I m screaming, Call 911, and he never moved."
Paramedics took the baby to the hospital emergency room. 
According to Anastasi, Wilson continued to act strangely. "
So we went out to the car, and Garrett stopped and took the time to unlock the car, pull the seat up, reach in the back, and take the baby seat out.
And I m thinking,
He knows the baby s not coming home.
He s done something to him. " 
Within an hour, the baby, then 5 months old, was pronounced dead at the hospital.
Anastasi was devastated.
She says that Wilson seemed untouched by the death. 
Several weeks later, Wilson surprised his wife again: "He brought money home in a brown paper bag and threw it on the bed where I was sleeping.
And I said, What is this?
And he said, It s some insurance money. " 
She began to suspect that Wilson had killed his son for insurance money.
But the medical examiner concluded that the baby had died from Sudden Infant Death Syndrome despite the fact that the baby s brain showed swelling, which can be evidence of foul play. 
So she put her suspicions aside and decided to stay with Wilson.
She and Wilson stayed together for seven years.
But the marriage wasn t easy.
With Wilson moving around the country, from one sales job to another, they were apart for months at a time. 
Says Anastasi: "He still called - that was the most amazing thing.
I m thinking in my mind, He has no reason to keep up with me, except that he cares about me, like he says he does.
I wanted to be married.
And I loved him." 
What happens next?
Find out:
Relief At The Pump? 
Twenty-eight million Americans are expected to hit the road Memorial Day weekend the official start of the summer driving season and the the vice president has an encouraging prediction. 
"I think the price is going to come down this summer on gasoline," said Dick Cheney. 
But the prices at the pump are still historically high, and at this point any drop is welcome. 
"It's making my pocketbook hurt," said one motorist. 
That's what drivers have been saying, but truth is, reports CBS News Correspondent Cynthia Bowers, high prices haven't slowed traffic a bit or dimmed America's love affair with gas guzzling mini-vans, sport utilities and pick-ups.
According to the government, fuel economy for the average new car or truck is at its lowest level in 20 years.
Energy efficient vehicles are out there, customers aren't. 
"Carmakers have discovered through some very sophisticated research that their customers aren't going to change their buying habits until gasoline gets to four or five dollars a gallon," said Keith Crain of Automotive News. 
That's three bucks more than we're paying now, but gas prices nationwide appear to have leveled off, ending a series of increases that sent prices up 29 cents a gallon over a two-month period. 
The average price of gas, including all grades and taxes, rose only about three-quarters of a cent between May 4 and May 18, to $1.76 per gallon, according to the Lundberg Survey of 8,000 stations nationwide. 
Click here for state by state gas prices. 
While prices remain at an all-time unadjusted high, increased supplies have at least temporarily put an end to the big price hikes that alarmed motorists, said analyst Trilby Lundberg. 
"The refiners and marketers have stepped up to the plate to meet the challenge of splintering supplies of the many types of gasoline required around the country to prevent smog," Lundberg said, "and supplies are no longer so critical." 
Even as demand rises with Memorial Day weekend, prices should remain steady and could fall a couple of cents in many cities, Lundberg said. 
She said recent price jumps were due to strain on the market caused by the difficulty of manufacturing the different gas formulas used around the country, and were not connected to production cuts by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). 
The average weighted prices on Friday were $1.72 per gallon for self-serve regular, $1.82 for self-serve midgrade and $1.90 for self-serve premium.
For full-service, the prices were $2.05 for regular, $2.14 for midgrade and $2.22 for premium. 
A sanguine vice president said this weekend there were reasons to be optimistic that the summer driving season wouldn't see even more pain at the pump. 
Dick Cheney pointed to inventories, which he said have begun "to build a bit and if you look at the futures prices with respect to gasoline, they appear to be headed down.
" 
"The expectation is that sometime, hopefully not too long after Memorial Day, we will begin to see those inventories reflected at the prices at the pump and the pressure will leave," he said. 
The 1973-74 OPEC oil embargo, imposed on Western nations who aided Israel in the October 1973 hostilities between the Jewish state and Arab countries, caused gasoline prices to more than triple in the United States. 
The embargo sparked a global economic recession caused by inflated energy prices, lasting almost 10 years.
The Emmy Awards will go bicoastal, adding a broadcast from an NBC studio in New York for nominees who want to avoid traveling to California for the Oct. 7 ceremony. 
Once an Emmy staple, the East Coast-West Coast simulcast was discontinued by the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences more than two decades ago. 
"We're doing it this year in light of the terrible events" of Sept. 11, said incoming TV academy chairman Bryce Zabel.
"We're reaching out to our friends in New York to give them as much comfort and security as possible." 
New York-based nominees and presenters who prefer not to leave "loved ones and families" can gather in NBC's Studio 6A, where "Late Night with Conan O'Brien" is taped, Emmy executive producer Don Mischer said. 
"We think it's the right thing to do," Mischer said Friday.
"Linking New York and Los Angeles is very appropriate given what we've been going through in the last few weeks." 
About four to five of the 27 total prime-time awards will be presented in New York, with any winners there able to accept their award on camera, Mischer said.
CBS is airing the ceremony. 
There are more than 100 nominees on the East Coast, he said.
That includes most of the cast and production team for HBO's drama series "The Sopranos," a leading Emmy contender. 
An HBO spokeswoman said Friday it was unknown if series star James Gandolfini and others with the show would travel to Los Angeles or choose to remain back East. 
Acknowledging President Bush's call for Americans to resume air travel, Zabel said anyone coming to the Los Angeles ceremony will be warmly welcomed. 
"But our sense was that if we wanted to put on a telecast that had the highest possibility of involving men and women who deserve to be honored" the dual broadcast was the best approach, he said. 
The awards, which were scheduled for Sept. 16, were immediately postponed following terrorist attacks on New York and Washington. 
In changes aimed at creating a subdued and respectful ceremony, attendees are being encouraged to wear business attire instead of tuxedoes and gowns, and there will be no bleachers filled with cheering fans. 
Veteran newsman Walter Cronkite will make opening remarks, and tributes to those caught up in the terrorist attacks are planned. 
"I hope we can create a sense that this time the Emmys are less about the horse race, less about whether 'The Sopranos' or 'The West Wing' wins the most Emmys, and more about people in the business coming together," Mischer said. 
The annual post-ceremony Governors Ball has been renamed the "Unity Dinner." 
In 1955, the Emmy ceremony began airing nationally with an East Coast-West Coast simulcast.
The New York portion was dropped in the 1970s, according to the TV academy. 
The change reflected the fact that the bulk of TV entertainment production had moved west, said Thomas O'Neil, author of "The Emmys." 
"This will remind us of what an important TV town New York is," O'Neil said, with network corporate headquarters, news and sports divisions based there. 
Napster, sued by the recording industry in 1999 for copyright infringement, said it could now block more than 99 percent of all infringing song files.
But Patel told Napster it needed to block 100 percent of unauthorized, copyright songs or stay offline indefinitely. 
Napster immediately sought relief from the appeals court, which overturned Patel in a two-sentence order. 
Napster's free song-sharing service has been down since July 2. 
It's not the first time the appeals panel reversed Patel in this case. 
In February, the court modified Patel's order demanding Napster to remove all protected works from its site.
The panel said Napster must remove the works, but only after the recording industry notifies Napster which files on Napster's servers contain copyright songs. 
Napster reminded the appeals court of that earlier ruling when it asked the appeals court to lift Patel's most recent order. 
The Recording Industry Association of America noted that the court only temporarily lifted Patel's order and will hear arguments on the case later this year.
At that time, the industry said it expects to prevail. 
"We are confident that after a thorough review, the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals will uphold Judge Patel's decision," RIAA attorney Cary Sherman said. 
Sherman added that the three-judge panel's decision still requires Napster to remove copyright works that both Patel and the appeals court have found were violating copyright laws. 
"It is important to note that today's ruling does not change in any way the fact that Napster must prevent copyrighted works from appearing on its system as previously ordered by the court," Sherman said. 
In his latest Against the Grain commentary, CBSNews.com's Dick Meyer charts the return to the headlines of two familiar political faces. 
Thank God for small certainties and the things that never change.
Like Bill Clinton and Al Gore. 
They have each choreographed little resurrections during the political news vacuum that is August in Washington.
And they have each displayed once again their quintessential public characters. 
The German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche thought history repeated itself in big loops.
Maybe he was right.
How many times will Bill Clinton cash in?
How many times will Al Gore try to reinvent himself? 
Gore's case is just pathetic. 
After cloistering himself since Florida, Gore intended to have his "I'm Back" event at a Nashville program to groom young Democratic pols later this month.
But that plan got mangled when pictures appeared of Gore in Europe sporting a new beard. 
A beard on Al Gore?
Shades of earth tones; echoes of alpha male.
One more image to try on. 
The official arbiter of who's cool in politics and who's not, Maureen Dowd, pounced instantly in The New York Times.
She fried him good with clever comparisons to Pepe LePew and Orson Welles. 
More ominously, just one page over, the Times' lead Sunday editorial seemed to be asking Gore not to run in 2004.
It said, "If Mr. Gore decides to opt for being a sort of elder statesman rather than a presidential hopeful, he will never have to hear another critique of his wardrobe." 
So Gore's reentry was wrecked, but in a perfectly Gore-esque way.
Again, his fatal flaw a tendency toward calculated spontaneity and rootless reinvention was revealed with all the clarity and inevitability of a Greek tragedy. 
Clinton's case, as always, is shabbier.
His comeback party in Harlem went off without a hitch, of course.
It was a smashing success, a technicolor political rally entirely inappropriate for a former president.
It was a scene straight out of "Primary Colors." 
That set the table for the real news: a $10 million book deal (maybe more, it has been reported). 
Clinton has every right to get as much as possible for his books, and his speeches for that matter.
But couldn't he have tempered his buck-raking by some kind of do-gooding?
Shouldn't he, by this point in his ex-presidency, give some indication of what his contribution to the world might be beyond making money? 
Clinton's Harlem rally marked the end of his penance from the midnight pardons and plea bargains of his last days in office.
He used the Clinton touch to pave the way for the announcement of a huge book deal, not for an unveiling of Citizen Clinton's new agenda.
After months and months of getting hundreds of thousands of dollars for speeches to groups he often won't reveal, he could have at least spent an hour at a Habitat for Humanity construction site like Jimmy Carter. 
But why should he?
He's done nothing illegal.
And the market for Bill Clinton products still seems robust. 
Some things never change.
Complex File Infects
Tens
Of Thousands Of Computers
Can Be Spread Through Web Sites
As Well As E-Mail Has Spread To Asian Businesses; Seems To Be Abating In U.S. 
As American companies recovered from the latest Internet worm, the complex "Nimda" program struck companies around the world, shutting down sites in Norway, Japan and elsewhere. 
The virus-like program spreads rapidly through many ways to infect computers running Microsoft's Windows operating system. 
It appears to combine the worst characteristics of this summer's Code Red Virus and those of "I Love You," "Melissa" and other e-mail viruses that have plagued PC users for the past couple of years, reports CBS News Computer Consultant
Larry Magid . 
Nimda seemed to be abating in the United States Wednesday.
The worm is still active, but many system administrators are seeing it less. 
"We are still seeing some activity, but it doesn't seem to be quite as active," said Vincent Gullotto, McAfee.com's head virus researcher. 
Experts implored computer users to update their anti-virus software and visit Microsoft's Web site to download protective software before reading their e-mail or visiting other Web sites. 
Gullotto said the worm wasn't as active in Europe or the Middle East, but more so in Asia and Australia.
However, he said there is no geographic bias programmed into the worm, and researchers still aren't sure where it came from. 
Several researchers noted that the first reports of the worm came almost exactly a week after the twin terrorist attacks in Washington and New York.
But Attorney General John Ashcroft has said there is no evidence linking the worm to last week's attacks. 
Web search engine company Yahoo was one of the firms infected by the Nimda, company spokesman Kevin Timmons confirmed.
The company's nonpublic corporate network has been infected, but the public Web site is not. 
The malicious software program is designed to spread to people who open infected e-mail or visit an infected Web site.
The program also generates more traffic on the Web, slowing down users. 
Every major anti-virus company has updated software that can detect and remove Nimda. 
Microsoft has provided several different updates for both Web servers and home computers on its Web site. 
Major sporting sites in Norway, including the Norwegian Sports Federation site, were knocked offline Tuesday night when their Web provider was infected. 
In Japan, Tsuru Credit Union spokesman Takao Ide said the bank which is west of Tokyo shut down its Web site after finding it infected with the program. 
After the shutdown, the bank suspended accepting account settlements and transfers of funds by customers via the Internet, Ide said. 
Several other Japanese entities were suspected of being hit by the computer worm, including Yamanashi Gakuin University, the Kyodo News agency and the Chunichi newspaper. 
The Swedish government was forced to quarantine some government computers after they were infected. 
The worm can spread in many different ways.
It can infect Web sites running Microsoft's Internet Information Services software, like the recent "Code Red" worm did.
Once a Web site is infected, any Web user accessing it can get the worm. 
Once one computer on a company network is infected, it can also travel across the network to attack others.
Together, this can cause an entire corporate network to be infected if even a single worker visits an infected Web site. 
Finally, it can send itself through an e-mail attachment.
The sender address is faked, and may be a well-known address.
Researchers said they weren't sure how the address is generated.
The attachment may be named "README.EXE." 
In addition to the hailstorm of junk messages slowing down Internet access around infected computers, it can overwrite critical Microsoft Windows system files, requiring a costly and time-consuming repair. 
The only clues to Nimda's origin are the words "Copyright 2001 R.P.China," which indicates a possible but far from definite link to China.
Also, the words "Concept virus," appear. 
Researchers say the worm could have been built as a proof of concept to see how it performs. 
"It's apparently a pretty effective one," Gullotto said. 
Alan Paller, director of research at the Sans Institute, a computer security think tank, said Nimda is far more efficient and powerful than the "Code Red" worm, which hit in July and August. 
"Each time we turn over a rock, there's another...way it weaves itself in," Paller said.
"This one's going to be with us a long time." 
AP Macedonia called for a state of war in early May after a rebel attack killed eight soldiers but was dissuaded by Western powers, who argued it would inflame the situation, alienate ethnic Albanians and complicate the search for peace. 
The attacks marked an escalation in Macedonia's months-long conflict between government forces and ethnic Albanian militants, who say they are fighting for broader rights for their community. 
The insurgency erupted in February, claiming the lives of more than a dozen government troops and at least as many rebels. 
The government, dominated by the majority Slavs, regards the rebels as terrorists bent on seizing control of a large piece of Macedonian territory and merging it with neighboring Albania and the adjacent Kosovo province in southern Yugoslavia. 
The other major battle zone, northeast of the capital, Skopje, also was tense, with occasional gun fire exchange.
Resisting a series of government offensives, the rebels remain entrenched there in a cluster of ethnic Albanian villages, together with a few thousand civilians. 
The largest city in the northeast, Kumanovo, which is controlled by the government, has suffered from acute water shortages because rebels control a reservoir that supplies the city with drinking water. 
Macedonian authorities have threatened to wipe out the rebels and end the insurgency, which many fear could spread to other Balkan regions. 
Ethnic Albanians make up about one-third of the population in this country of 2 million. 
Macedonian state radio reported three of the dead soldiers were from the southwestern town of Bitola.
When several soldiers from that town died in clashes last month, riots erupted in Bitola, with Slavic residents damaging the shops and homes of local ethnic Albanians. 
U.S. Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld visited Macedonia on Tuesday, talking to his counterpart, Vlado Buckovski, who appealed for the United States to help stem the influx of money and weapons sent by ethnic Albanian ?
migr?s from the West to the rebel movement here. 
The government also requested U.S. assistance in training Macedonian army commando units. 
The United States and its allies have condemned the violence in Macedonia and urged the Slav-led government and ethnic Albanian leaders to work out their differences peacefully.
Sen. Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, the nation's longest-serving senator, collapsed Tuesday in the Senate after saying he felt weak.
But a few minutes later the 98-year-old Republican was standing and talking. 
The senior senator was described as waving as he was being taken away by wheelchair, Senate officials said.
He was later taken to Walter Reed Army Medical Center by ambulance. 
Shortly after 10:30 a.m. EDT, Thurmond slumped over at his desk, then was helped to a lying position on the floor by several people.
Senate GOP Leader Trent Lott told reporters Thurmond was able to stand before he was taken to the ambulance, an oxygen mask on his face. 
Sen. Wayne Allard, R-Colo., was standing next to Thurmond when the senior senator tried to stand with the help of an aide and collapsed back into his chair, nearly unconscious, said Allard spokesman Sean Conway. 
Allard and staffers then helped lay Thurmond on the floor. 
Thurmond was in the chamber as the Senate was debating a defense bill when the incident occurred.
When he collapsed, most Republicans were in a closed-door senators' meeting a few paces down the hall from the Senate chamber. 
Sen. Bill Frist, R-Tenn., a heart surgeon, immediately left the meeting and ran to Thurmond's aid.
When he got there, Thurmond was lying in the aisle near his desk at the front of the chamber with three people surrounding him. 
"Dr. Frist checked his response and the best way to describe his condition was that he was woozy," said Sen. Wayne Allard, R-Colo. 
After Thurmond's legs were raised, "he started getting less woozy," Allard said. 
The Senate recessed for 20 minutes after Thurmond fainted, and Majority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D., ordered the chamber cleared. 
Capitol police then clamped an extraordinary ring of security around the Senate chamber, the corridors outside and even the parking lot outside the Capitol. 
"Are they really making all this fuss for me?"
Thurmond said, according to Frist spokeswoman Margaret Camp. 
Thurmond, born in December 1902, is legendary for both his political and physical endurance.
He was first elected to the Senate in 1954.
A one-time Democratic segregationist, he holds the record for a solo Senate filibuster.
He has gradually scaled back his duties in recent years as his health declined. 
In 1996, at the age of 93, he became the oldest person ever to serve in Congress, and the following year, became the longest-serving member. 
When Republicans controlled the Senate from 1981-87, Thurmond was at the peak of his power.
He was both chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, and, as the longest-serving member of the majority party, also president pro tem, a chiefly ceremonial job that made him third in line to succeed the president. 
When the Republicans regained a majority in 1995, Thurmond again was president pro tem and became chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, where he pushed for increased military spending. 
He stepped aside as chairman two years later as age began to take its toll.
When Democrats regained control of the Senate earlier this year, he also turned over the title of president pro tem to Sen. Robert C. Byrd, D-W.Va. 
While Thurmond has been to the hospital several times - including a February stay for fatigue - this was the first time health problems affected him while in the Senate chamber. 
How long Thurmond will remain in the hospital was not immediately known, said his spokeswoman, Genevieve Erny.
It almost happened once before, a little more than a year and a half ago.
That s when the world was getting ready to ring in the new millennium.
It s also when Islamic terrorists, directed from Afghanistan, were preparing to mark the occasion by killing Americans, here and overseas - in a series of spectacular bombings. 
The operation was foiled at the last minute.
But it came so close that it should have served as a wake-up call to all Americans.
The millennium plot revealed, in startling clarity, exactly how the Osama bin Laden network operated and how it would operate in the future.
The single most important piece of evidence was the mind of an American citizen. 
Raed Hijazi was born in California.
He wound up in a cage in this Jordanian courtroom last month because he is accused of playing a leading role in the plot to kill other Americans.
His father, Mohammed, a civil engineer who lived in California for eight years, can't believe it. 
He studied there, and he lived there," says his father. "
Yeah, he got American custom.
But he remained as really Islamic religious man.
But ordinary.
Not terrorist." 
Hijazi has bruises on his forehead.
They come from a lot of praying.
In the Middle East, they are seen as the mark of a more-than-ordinary religious man.
He wasn't always so religious.
In the mid '80s, Hijazi looked like an exceedingly ordinary American teen-ager.
He went to study business at Cal-State-Sacremento.
In 1990, he went to Pakistan to help Afghan refugees.
At leas,t that's what he told his father.
He stayed in the region for four years.
His father says his son didn t tell him much about his work. 
At around this time, Jordanian intelligence began hearing about a radicalized American in Afghanistan.
He was known to his comrades in the jihad camps as Abu Ahmed the American.
His specialty was explosives. 
In 1997, Hijazi went back to America, this time, to Boston where, in the shadow of Fenway Park, he got a license to drive a taxi for a Boston Cab Company.
He stayed for a little over a year, sending money back to his father and, as the Jordanians would later learn, to some new friends. 
"He used some of his money to buy some ingredients to manufacture explosives and other things for later use in military operations in Jordan," says Colonel Mahmoud Obeidat, Jordan's chief military prosecutor. 
But the Jordanians didn't know that then.
They became suspicious only at the end of 1998, when they started hearing about an operation called Bethlehem 2000.
Around the same time, Hijazi left Boston and, traveling on an American passport, stopped in London, where he bought five two-way radios.
Then he disappeared.
Back in Amman, Jordan's capital, the intelligence services started picking up clues that a terrorist cell was being activated. 
The remains of a biblical city and the ruins of the Roman Temple of Hercules lie in the heart of Amman, a reminder of the glory that was Jordan 2,000 years ago.
In December 1999, just after Christmas, the terrorists were planning another kind of reminder.
Hundreds of American tourists were expected here for the millennium celebrations.
The terrorists planned to mark the occasion with a bomb.
They wanted to ring in the New Year by killing Americans. 
Other holy sites were on the hit list: a hill near the Dead Sea where Jesus was baptized by John the Baptist.
Thousands of pilgrims were expected there.
Another target: Mount Nebo, which Moses climbed to see the promised land.
But the top target was the Radisson hotel in downtown Amman, its 400 rooms fully booked by Americans and Israelis for the big millennium party.
Jordanian agents got word that the man known as Abu Ahmed the American was boasting there wouldn't be enough body bags in Jordan to hold all the corpses. 
Everything was set.
The planning had been completed, the explosives were hidden in Amman.
Abu Ahmed the American was about to return here from Afghanistan.
It might have come off if Jordanian intelligence hadn't intercepted a phone call on the evening of Nov. 30 from Osama bin Laden's lieutenant in Pakistan to the cell in Amman.
The lieutenant spoke in code.
His words were: The grooms are ready for the big wedding. 
The message had come from Abu Zubaydah.
Osama bin Laden's chief recruiter.
The Jordanians had heard enough.
That night they raided 16 homes, and arrested 16 men.
Abu Ahmed the American wasn't among them.
But his name came up in interrogations.
Hussein Turi, an Algerian, signed a confession naming Abu Ahmed the American as a leader of the cell.
Other suspects told their interrogators about a safe house in a refugee camp in the outskirts of Amman.
Police stormed the house and found hidden under a sofa five two-way radios wired as detonators.
When they ripped the floor open, they discovered canisters, 70 of them, leaking and highly toxic. 
"If these chemicals had been mixed and manufactured well, they would have resulted in very dangerous explosives, enough to bring a huge explosion.
These chemicals were even just dangerous to breathe," says Obeidat. 
All together, it added up to 5,000 pounds of nitric and sulfuric acid, enough to blow up not just the Radisson, but the entire neighborhood.
Word of the plot reached Washington by the first week of December, and alarms went off. 
"I remember that we were all really astonished just at the bits and pieces that came in at the beginning, at the amount of firepower that was involved, explosive, also the number of conspirators, because it was quite a lot of people," says Daniel Benjamin, who was in charge of transnational threats at the White House.
He says there could have been hundreds of casualties. 
What about Abu Ahmed the American?
Investigators discovered that on June 20, he had crossed the border from Jordan into Syria on his way to Afghanistan.
They obtained passport photos of everyone who crossed the border that day and showed them to the men they had already arrested.
The prisoners pointed to one picture, the man they knew as Abu Ahmed the American.
His real name - Raed Hijazi. 
At the time, they couldn't find Raed Hijazi.
So he was tried and convicted in absentia.
The crime: terrorism.
The sentence: death. 
Hussein Turi, the Algerian who'd been the first to own up about the plot in Jordan, also revealed the existence of another terrorist cell, which was run by fellow Algerians in Montreal.
Jordanian intelligence suspected that this cell was also planning an attack to coincide with the millennium, and that the target would not be Canada, but the United States. 
In early December, the Canadians began monitoring a group of Algerians in Montreal.
But they didn't notice when one of them, who went by the name of Benni Norris, slipped out of his apartment building and started driving west.
Norris checked into a Vancouver motel and asked for a room in the back.
No one really paid much attention when strange chemical fumes began coming out of his window. 
Then Benni Norris took to the road again.
On Dec. 14, 1999, he drove to Victoria, a coastal town in British Columbia.
That's where he took a ferry.
His car was the last to board on the last ferry of the day.
Destination:
Port Angeles - the port of the angels - a fishing and logging town in Washington State.
With his Canadian passport in hand, Norris was one checkpoint away from disappearing into the United States.
Then he met Diana Dean. 
"He approached in my lane, and I just started to ask him a couple of routine Customs questions," says Dean, a U.S. customs inspector for 20 years.
That night, she was ready to go home. 
"So I asked him where he was going.
And he replied "Sattle," with an accent.
And I said, "What, what are you, why are you going to Seattle?"
And he said, "Bisit."
And by this time, he was becoming very agitated, and, and rummaging around in the console of his car." 
"There was just something - something that wasn't quite right and something that needed a little closer look."
Dean asked Norris to open his trunk.
Two other inspectors joined her. 
"One inspector took a bag out of, the one bag that was in the trunk, took it out and started to look at it," Dean remembers. "
The other inspector unscrewed the wheel cover, and lifted the cover off the wheel well.
And it was right there.
There were just big bags of something." 
At that point, Norris made a run for it.
He got to the main street and tried to hijack a car.
He was finally tackled by inspector Mark Johnson, who brought Norris back to the customs post. 
"I'm sitting at the desk thinking, What in the heck do we have here?"
Johnson remembers. "
He ran from us for a reason.
And I remember those black boxes that were sitting, little, plastic, rectangular boxes sitting on top of the bags in the trunk.
I opened up one of those boxes.
And I saw a circuit board, and I saw the, the little Casio watch." 
"I looked at it
and I just felt the blood just go out of my body.
I just - all the blood just drained to my toes, saying I knew what we had.
And it wasn't good," says Dean. 
They had the material for a bomb.
They soon learned from the FBI that the man they'd arrested might have had a Canadian passport with the name Benni Norris.
But he was really an Algerian and his real name was Ahmed Ressam. 
"When I looked into his eyes that night they were dead.
His eyes were dead.
There was no soul.
It was no light.
There was nothing in his eyes.
They were just flat," Dean says. 
In Ressam's trunk, 100 pounds of explosives.
In the car, a map of Los Angeles, with a circle drawn around LA's International Airport.
Ressam's target was a terminal at LAX. 
"What has happened with the religiously-motivated terrorists of the last 10 years is that they clearly see carnage itself as a, as a goal, and causing as many casualties as possible.
So it was clear from that perspective that we were dealing with the Jihadists centered around bin Laden," says Benjamin. 
Ahmed Ressam revealed in his trial that Abu Zubaydah, bin Laden's key lieutenant, had recruited him and paid for his training in Afghanistan. 
The Jordanians learned more about bin Laden's connection to the millennium plot last year, when they finally captured Raed Hijazi, alias Abu Ahmed the American.
Officials say he made a full confession in prison. 
"He admitted in a statement that he was in Afghanistan, that he trained in the manufacture of explosives and that he planned to undertake military-style operations in Jordan," says Obeidat, the prosecutor. 
Hijazi and his father say his confession was beaten out of him.
But American intelligence believes Jordan has its man.
Not only that.
The FBI is now investigating whether Hijazi had financial dealings with two of the hijackers who slammed into the World Trade Center.
And looking at the sky where the twin towers once stood puts what almost happened in December 1999 in a fresh and frightening perspective. 
When New Yorkers looked up the night the millennium changed, the only thing clouding the skies was confetti.
That seems such an awfully long time ago.
The Emmy Awards will go bicoastal, adding a broadcast from an NBC studio in New York for nominees who want to avoid traveling to California for the Oct. 7 ceremony. 
Once an Emmy staple, the East Coast-West Coast simulcast was discontinued by the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences more than two decades ago. 
"We're doing it this year in light of the terrible events" of Sept. 11, said incoming TV academy chairman Bryce Zabel.
"We're reaching out to our friends in New York to give them as much comfort and security as possible." 
New York-based nominees and presenters who prefer not to leave "loved ones and families" can gather in NBC's Studio 6A, where "Late Night with Conan O'Brien" is taped, Emmy executive producer Don Mischer said. 
"We think it's the right thing to do," Mischer said Friday.
"Linking New York and Los Angeles is very appropriate given what we've been going through in the last few weeks." 
About four to five of the 27 total prime-time awards will be presented in New York, with any winners there able to accept their award on camera, Mischer said.
CBS is airing the ceremony. 
There are more than 100 nominees on the East Coast, he said.
That includes most of the cast and production team for HBO's drama series "The Sopranos," a leading Emmy contender. 
An HBO spokeswoman said Friday it was unknown if series star James Gandolfini and others with the show would travel to Los Angeles or choose to remain back East. 
Acknowledging President Bush's call for Americans to resume air travel, Zabel said anyone coming to the Los Angeles ceremony will be warmly welcomed. 
"But our sense was that if we wanted to put on a telecast that had the highest possibility of involving men and women who deserve to be honored" the dual broadcast was the best approach, he said. 
The awards, which were scheduled for Sept. 16, were immediately postponed following terrorist attacks on New York and Washington. 
In changes aimed at creating a subdued and respectful ceremony, attendees are being encouraged to wear business attire instead of tuxedoes and gowns, and there will be no bleachers filled with cheering fans. 
Veteran newsman Walter Cronkite will make opening remarks, and tributes to those caught up in the terrorist attacks are planned. 
"I hope we can create a sense that this time the Emmys are less about the horse race, less about whether 'The Sopranos' or 'The West Wing' wins the most Emmys, and more about people in the business coming together," Mischer said. 
The annual post-ceremony Governors Ball has been renamed the "Unity Dinner." 
In 1955, the Emmy ceremony began airing nationally with an East Coast-West Coast simulcast.
The New York portion was dropped in the 1970s, according to the TV academy. 
The change reflected the fact that the bulk of TV entertainment production had moved west, said Thomas O'Neil, author of "The Emmys." 
"This will remind us of what an important TV town New York is," O'Neil said, with network corporate headquarters, news and sports divisions based there. 
The LJ is the 250-year-old traditional Afghan parliament of tribal, religious and ethnic leaders, which is the only legitimate authority that could form a new government and attract broad support from the people and the anti-Taliban factions.
Many Taliban have secretly supported the LJ process, but have been unwilling to confront hardliners within the movement led by leader Mullah Omar.
With the present crisis and the imminent collapse of the Taliban regime, these Taliban dissidents are now directly approaching LJ representatives. 
Zahir Shah has lived in Rome since 1973, when he was ousted in a coup by his cousin Mohammed Daud, who set up a Republic and made himself President.
Zahir Shah ascended to the throne in 1933 after watching his father be assassinated by a student in Kabul.
During Zahir Shah's reign, Afghanistan enjoyed peace and in the 1960s Kabul became a venue for Western hippies.
Most Afghans look back to that period with enormous nostalgia.
Zahir Shah has said he has no intentions to reconstitute the monarchy, rather his role would be unite all Afghan forces through the LJ process. 
On September 20 Zahir Shah issued an appeal "for the liberation of our homeland and people."
His supporters in Pakistan and the Arab Gulf states say they are ready to act. "
Hundreds of Taliban are ready to defect the moment the King gives an order for a national uprising," says a leading member of the LJ based in Pakistan.
"We believe that the ground will soon be ready to hold a LJ inside Afghanistan with the help of international powers, the United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic Conference," he adds. 
Such Afghan forces must play a significant role as the U.S. plans its military strategy.
U.S. forces will face major military difficulties in Afghanistan, where the terrain of high mountains and deserts is extreme, and Taliban-Arab forces are likely to break up into small, highly mobile guerrilla groups.
There are few obvious targets and overexposure of U.S. forces could lead to a wider backlash by the fiercely nationalistic Afghans, who in the last two centuries have defeated British and Soviet invaders. 
It would be unwise for Washington to deploy ground troops to invade or occupy even a small part of Afghan territory for any period of time.
U.S. special forces could occupy an airbase inside Afghanistan to facilitate operations, but bombing cities or even trying to occupy them would be hazardous and useless. 
Instead it would be prudent for the United States to provide air cover and other military aid to the anti-Taliban forces inside the country.
Such action could encourage defections among Taliban forces.
The Taliban need to know that there are Afghan forces on the ground to which they can defect - not the Americans.
As the anti-Taliban forces take territory and cities, U.S. forces will need to provide massive humanitarian aid so that the population is protected by U.S. air cover and fed in the liberated areas.
Local Taliban commanders still holding out would come under their people's pressure to surrender and thereby receive food. 
By supporting the LJ process, and encouraging all anti-Taliban Afghan factions to join it, the United States could set in motion a political process, which could result in the establishment of a stable post-Taliban political order, garnering support from all of Afghanistan's ethnic groups.
But such a political process would need a long-term U.S. commitment, a U.S.-led consensus from the international community and intense dialogue with all of Afghanistan's neighbors, including Iran. 
The U.S. would also have to deal with its new ally Pakistan, which has supported the Taliban and which may try once again to foster a client regime in Kabul.
Pakistan has to be convinced that any new government in Kabul will not pose a threat to Pakistan, and will still be heavily dependent on Pakistan for food, aid and trade. 
Thus, the United States has to construct a global alliance not just for the war, but also for the peace.
Washington cannot do this alone.
It needs the support of the United Nations and in particular the office of U.N. Secretary General's Special Representative to Afghanistan, whose successive chiefs have for the past 12 years been trying to bring peace to Afghanistan.
The present UN Special Representative Fransesc Vendrell has said that this is a moment of acute crisis for the Afghan people, but also a moment of hope.
UN efforts in the past have been stymied by the opposition of the Afghan factions and by Afghanistan's neighbors, particularly Pakistan.
A major cause for past UN failure has been the lack of support from the international community.
In her latest Political Points commentary, CBS News Senior Political Editor Dotty Lynch takes a look at Tom Daschle, the Senate Majority Leader-in-waiting. 
"America is about to fall in love with Tom Daschle ," gushed California Sen. Barbara Boxer about the soon-to-be Senate Majority Leader. 
Boxer, one of the few senators who is shorter than the five-foot-six South Dakotan, is not the first woman to be wowed by him.
Old friends from South Dakota remember him as a quiet, hardworking, young field director for Sen. Jim Abourezk, married to a drop-dead gorgeous woman.
In 1978, Daschle and his first wife, Laurie, rang 40,000 doorbells during his campaign for the House, and he eked out a 139-vote victory in a recount.
His current wife, Linda, is a former Miss Kansas who went on to become a Washington lobbyist and a top official at the FAA. 
"He has a way of delivering a negative message in a very positive way," says Anita Dunn, his longtime political advisor.
Daschle has been the Democratic minority leader since 1995, when he beat Connecticut Sen. Christopher Dodd for the job by one vote.
And he has spent years in politics being underestimated.
Dodd now describes him as a terrific listener who "gives everyone a chance, and who never gives anyone the feeling that what they had to say was not important." 
Sen. Robert Byrd of West Viriginia, who supported Dodd in that fight, says, "I was totally wrong about this young man.
He has steel in his spine despite his reasonable and modest demeanor." 
Daschle is soft-spoken, earnest and, at 53, almost too choir-boyish.
The son of a bookkeeper in an auto parts store from Aberdeen, S.D., he went to Catholic schools, then to college on an ROTC scholarship, before serving as Air Force intelligence officer from 1969-1972. 
Though he never saw combat in Vietnam, Daschle joined the Veterans Affairs Committee in 1979 and moved it away from a concentration on World War II-generation issues to Vietnam-era problems like Agent Orange. 
He continues to methodically work his home state and spends three weeks most every August driving though all of South Dakota's 66 counties. 
Although he has been the Democratic leader for six years, the Democrats were in the majority for only 17 days in that period during the few weeks in January when Al Gore, not Dick Cheney, held the tie-breaking vote in the Senate.
Daschle was able to forge a "groundbreaking power-sharing agreement" with Trent Lott which gave Democrats more clout on committees. 
Now his political skills as a negotiator, consensus builder and communicator are about to be tested for real.
And how well Daschle does will have major implications for the Democrats in Congress and for his own future. 
Daschle will not only become the leader of the Senate, but the most powerful Democrat in the United States and the one with a daily national podium at his disposal.
Since the election, Democrats have been floundering and looking for a spokesperson.
Clinton and Gore have both decided to maintain low profiles and Gore's advisors say that won't change any time soon. 
Daschle's name has been in the mix as a possible presidential contender in 2004, and he has not denied interest.
"I ll defer that decision until after 2002," he said on May 20, when he just happened to be in Iowa, site of the first-in-the-nation presidential caucus, campaigning for Sen. Tom Harkin. 
DASHPAC, his political fund-raising committee, contributed $429,100 to federal candidates in 2000.
In addition, it gave money to 150 state and local candidates, including $15,000 to New Hampshire Gov. Jeanne Shaheen.
During the April recess, after receiving raves from Common Cause for his leadership in the passage of McCain-Feingold, Daschle raised over $250,000 for senators up in 2002.
On June 7, the Washington lobbyist community will be out in full force when Daschle hosts a $5,000 a person fund-raiser for his PAC. 
"Up until now, the Democratic message has been almost exclusively 'no,'" says Daschle advisor Dunn.
Now the Democrats and their leader have an opportunity to form and articulate their own agenda. 
On Thursday, Daschle spoke to President Bush and talked cordially of bipartisanship.
He also said that his next legislative priorities would be education and the patients' bill of rights.
These are two top issues on the minds of the American people, but Daschle's vision of them is slightly different from Bush's.
Those Republicans who are not too shell-shocked by this week's events are skeptical, but we'll know soon if that sweet talk that snowed Barbara Boxer will work its magic on the national stage.
Asked about this by Rather, McCain responds diplomatically, saying that Bush has "conducted himself well" since winning the nomination.
But McCain also suggests that to win, Bush will have to attract McCain voters.
"There are large groups of voters out there that will decide this general election.
And those large groups of voters, not according to my instincts but actual polling data, are attracted to, and will support, a reform agenda." 
But even though Bush will likely need McCain's supporters, he hasn't phoned since McCain returned from vacation. 
McCain professes patience and says that he is not disappointed.
"I know that he's been very busy with formulating the campaign against Al Gore," he says.
"And I'm sure that there will be discussions." 
The former candidate also says that he is not surprised that Bush didn't call after his defeat in the Michigan primary.
"It's just a minor kind of thing," McCain says of Bush's failure to call.
"You just don't let something like that affect you in any way.
You just move on." 
McCain's fellow Republicans in the Senate are communicating with him, albeit delicately.
McCain is not a hero to many of his Republican colleagues.
Nevertheless they made an effort to appear friendly when he returned to Capitol Hill this week still preaching the gospel of reform. 
"Under no circumstances will we abandon the reform agenda," he said then.
"I intend to lead it.
I come back to the Senate, if I may say, in a self-serving way, with a great deal more influence than I had when I left.
And I will never ever, ever, ever give up." 
McCain says, though, that he will continue to work with his GOP colleagues but on reform. "
The Republican party can either reform and take up the reform agenda and become the party of reform, or they will be lost in the dustbin of history," he says. 
The senator says he is not worried that the GOP leadership does not agree with him and does not like him either, he says.
"At the end of the day, all politicians understand that the real key to maintaining power is being in tune with the electorate," he says. 
"So I think the leadership of my party (is) very interested in adopting this reform agenda, if not based on principle, although many of them are based on principle, but from the practical aspects of American politics," he says. 
McCain says he is proud of his campaign.
But he admits he made mistakes during the primary season that hurt him. 
For example, during the South Carolina primary, he ran an ad comparing Bush to President Clinton and saying that voters could trust neither.
Many observers criticized the ad.
In retrospect, McCain says, the ad may have been a mistake. 
McCain says that he does not regret making a speech attacking the religious right, a move that also caused controversy. 
"That speech had to be made, and it had to be made before the primary," he says.
"One of the reasons why our party has lost its way is because of the leadership, or the assumption of leadership by Jerry Falwell and Pat Robertson.
And these people have not been good for our party, and I don't believe they have practiced the politics of inclusion.
I think they've practiced the politics of exclusion.
That speech needed to be made, even if it may have done damage to my campaign." 
McCain isn't making many apologies, and he doesn't seem to want any either, despite a primary campaign that at times took on a harsh, sometimes personal tone. 
There were been allegations that before the South Carolina primary Bush supporters spread scurrilous rumors about McCain. 
Although McCain was angry at the time, he has put it behind him, he says. 
"I can forgive," he says.
"And I want to emphasize one other point: For me to look back in anger over what happened in this campaign would not only be a bit of self-pity
but it also would be very nonproductive." 
McCain says that as a loyal Republican, he has to back Bush.
But how hard will he campaign?
McCain is a student of history, and he knows that in 1976 Gerald Ford beat Ronald Reagan for the Republican presidential nomination.
Reagan endorsed the nominee, but without enthusiasm.
Ford lost. 
The senator isn't sure how the current situation will play out, he says.
"I don't know exactly what's going to transpire here," he says.
"What's going through my mind is to do everything I can to make sure that Al Gore is not president of the United States, No
. 1.
And No. 2 is that we maintain the majorities in both houses of Congress.
But transcendent above all is that we need to get the government back to the people of this country, and that means pursuing (a) reform agenda, and under no circumstances can I be dissuaded from that." 
McCain is convinced that the voters, particularly young voters, are listening to his message about reform and the value of service and sacrifice. 
"I've lost other times in my life, and life hasn't always been fair to me," he says.
"But I'm the luckiest guy that you will ever interview.
I've had a wonderful life.
We had a wonderful race.
We started out at 2 and 3 percent and we ended up making it a very competitive race.
I mean, this is the greatest experience of my life." 
"I was at UCLA, and with a number of hundreds of students there, I started talking about the nobility of service, and how wonderful it is to be part of this incredible experiment," he says.
"And it got real quiet.
And they paid attention.
This is really what's the rewarding thing about this campaign." 
McCain's crusade may have failed.
But he says he will keep fighting for his reform agenda.
He won't run as an independent.
But he will use a new political action committee to help reform-minded candidates.
And he will fight for reform within the Senate. 
"I think I can serve the country far better in the United States Senate," he says.
"Vice president of the United States would be a great honor obviously, but I think I have to assess where I can best serve the country.
And I think that's in the United States Senate." 
Would he ever consider accepting an offer from Bush to be the vice presidential candidate?
Says McCain: "Under no circumstances would I entertain such a proposal." 
Copyright 2000, CBS Worldwide Inc., All Rights Reserved.
Dennis Tito's trip into space was a unique vacation, but in reflecting on it Tuesday he sounded some notes common to mundane voyagers, saying the trip ended all too soon and that he wants to be seen as a traveler and not a mere tourist. 
"I would like people to see me as a serious man who had a dream and pursued in the face of great difficulty," he told a news conference at Star City, the cosmonaut training facility outside Moscow. 
"Unfortunately, life is short and I believe that one should do everything possible to achieve their dreams and hopefully this will be an inspiration to others to do the same," he said of the eight-day trip, including six days aboard the international space station. 
To encourage others, he rhapsodized about the experience, but still found himself at a loss for words two days after the voyage ended. 
After the flight to the space station, during which he suffered from space sickness, "once we reached the ISS ... it became for me a euphoric experience that lasted the entire six days, and if it were available to me I would have stayed up there for months," Tito said. 
"I spent 60 years on Earth and eight days in space and from my viewpoint it was two separate lives.
It would take a long time to explain," the 60-year-old American tycoon said. 
The most profound moment for him was when he spoke to his children on Earth over what he called a ham radio link, Tito said, choking up.
He did not give further details. 
He was more verbal on the topic of the fierce objections to the trip raised by the U.S. space agency NASA. 
Tito said NASA had always envisioned the space station as having a commercial potential for travelers and suggested the agency raised complaints because "we came along and pushed up the timetable maybe half a dozen years." 
"Change is sometimes difficult," he admonished.
"I don't feel bad about it at all." 
NASA chief Daniel Goldin last week drew a contrast between Tito, who negotiated his trip with Russian officials, and aspiring space tourist James Cameron, calling the film director "an American patriot" for dealing with the U.S. agency. 
"I don't think he's in a position to determine who is an American patriot and who isn't," Tito said sharply. 
NASA had complained that sending an amateur could interfere with the space station's work and Goldin later said Tito's trip was putting significant stress on NASA. 
But Russian officials argued that Tito had trained for months and rejected implications that his trip was turning the space station into an orbiting dude ranch.
Talgat Musabayev, one of two cosmonauts who traveled with Tito, spoke highly of his performance. 
"Any flight on a spacecraft, it's not a flight on a Boeing 747 airliner.
It's a completely different kind of flight...
completely different demands on one's health," he told the news conference. "
Dennis Tito was a full member of the crew, even though it appeared as if he were a tourist." 
Tito reportedly paid up to $20 million for the trip.
He said Tuesday that the bill has been paid in full, but said he could not state the cost because the contract's terms were confidential. 
Whatever the cost, "money is relative and for me it was a life dream.
It was a dream that began when I didn't have any money," he said. 
Nonetheless, his next jaunt is going to be more modest. 
"My next holiday will be chartering a small sailboat which I'll skipper myself, maybe with one other person.
A very inexpensive vacation, maybe a few thousand dollars." 
In the interim, he plans to speak out in favor of more opportunities for space visitors. 
"I think this will all turn out to be very positive, not only for NASA but for the relationship of Russia and the United States," he said. 
Tito, Musabayev and cosmonaut Yuri Baturin have been given an initial clean bill of health by doctors.
Tito is scheduled to return to the United States on Saturday. 
Constant Surveillance In Urban Areas
Face Recognition Technology Picks Out Likely Criminals
What About Civil Liberties? 
If there is one city that understands the horror of Sept. 11, it is London, which has lived with terrorism for decades.
Over the years, the city has developed ways to contain the threat. 
Colin and Elaine Perry lived through the Nazi blitz in World War II.
"It was absolutely shocking," he says.
"The whole landscape was desolate.
There wasn
t a thing standing." 
Even though they were teen-agers, both felt then what many Americans feel today. 
"I wanted revenge, not bitterness.
I wanted us to fight back," says Colin. 
From their own painful history, the British have taken measures to fight back terrorists, be they IRA bombers, or Osama bin Laden's cells. 
"I got fairly used to facing the threats from terrorism there," says Roger Davies, a former commander of the Northern Ireland bomb squad.
He says U.S. police need the same tools that British cops use.
Among them is Closed Circuit Television, or CCTV. 
The people of Great Britain are the most watched in the world.
Cameras are everywhere, watching nearly everything, from St. Paul s Cathedral to Parliament.
Across Great Britain, there are more than two million surveillance cameras, keeping an eye on street criminals, as well as terrorists. 
"Intelligence shows us that the IRA will avoid areas where the cameras are.
Because the terrorists know they will get caught one way or the other on camera," says Bob Lack, head of security for the Borough of Newham in east London.
From a control room, personnel monitor more than 250 cameras, which pan, zoom and record all life in public areas. 
Lack says the results have been dramatic: a 30 percent reduction in crime. 
Sir Robin Wales, the leader of the borough, says that he is not uncomfortable with the cameras: "I hope they're watching us!
Because the whole point is, I want to know this place is safe.
So I want these here.
And I want to catch the people that think they have the right to determine how the rest of us should live or what should happen to us." 
Lack says that CCTV evidence helped convict one man who set a bomb. 
Not everyone approves of the surveillance.
"When I look at a sign that warns me that I'm being watched, the first thing I think of is George Orwell, 1984.
A society where everybody just expects routinely to be monitored by the state," says civil liberties advocate Simon Davies. 
Davies estimates that six to seven million cameras will be installed in U.S. cities in the next four years.
"The primary challenge to human rights and to privacy from these cameras is simply that it makes people behave differently," Davies says.
"It makes them cautious, neurotic.
It changes their interactions.
Everybody is brought to heel.
Everybody s made to be good.
It's like living in some giant shopping mall." 
In Newham, there s more to these cameras than meets the eye.
Newham is the first place to use face recognition technology.
A computer scans faces on the street looking for a match with faces stored in its data bank.
Newham officials say matches happen about three times a day.
The police are then notified. 
Tim Pidgeon of Visionics, the company that developed the software, explains how it works.
First, a face is placed in the data bank.
Police can do the same with mug shots or pictures of known terrorists.
The computer scans the faces on camera looking for a match.
In a test with Van Sant, the computer makes the match in less than a second.
At that point, an alarm goes off, alerting an operator.
But the system is not perfect: It didn t make a match when Van Sant wore a cap and sunglasses. 
Face recognition technology is already in use at the Keflavic airport in Iceland. "
Technology like this will help to prevent acts of terrorism.
If you're known, you couldn't get onto a bus, a train, a plane without having an operator being alerted to your presence," says Lack. 
Davies hates the idea: "You can put up millions of cameras, connect them to a single computer, and just put the whole population on auto surveillance.
Now, that sort of society I regard as totally different to anything we ve known throughout history." 
Cameras also record the license plates of vehicles entering the center of London, in what s called the "Ring of Steel."
Many cars and trucks are searched. 
Davies says the British people themselves play a role: "In becoming more aware of our surroundings, asking what perhaps were before intrusive questions of our neighbors, but accepting that s one of the prices we have to pay to live in the world that we do." 
Despite all these measures, bombs sometimes still explode.
Davies says that this fact is something those in the modern world may have to learn to live with. 
The Perrys, who lived through the Blitz, are certain that Americans will prevail. 
"Have great faith in your nation, great faith in yourselves," says Colin. "
Stand firm."
France, Britain
To Talk On Concorde? 
Air France's Concordes must remain grounded because of continuing doubts about last month's crash, and the British and French should work on new safety measures for the plane, the French Transport Ministry said Friday. 
The ministry did not reveal if its inquiry into the July 25 disaster, which killed 113 people, had uncovered security problems with the basic Concorde design, but it urged caution. 
"Concorde is the only supersonic airliner in the world, and there are only a small number in service.
As a result, despite its long life, its track record is less developed than that of any other aircraft in civilian fleets," it said in a statement. 
British Airways, the only other company to operate Concordes, has resolutely maintained its supersonic service in the wake of the fatal accident. 
French Transport Minister Jean-Claude Gayssot said he would speak to his British counterpart later in the day to propose that their aviation authorities work together on "common measures" for Concorde in the light of current investigations. 
The British Civil Aviation Authority reiterated that it had full confidence in the needle-nosed plane.
"We have people working in France with the crash investigators, and we have heard nothing to indicate a problem with the plane itself," a spokesman said.
"The French would have told us immediately if there was any action that needed taking." 
The investigators say the stray piece of metal found on the edge of the runway "probably" ripped one of the tires of the doomed Concorde, CBS News Correspondent Russ Mitchell reports. 
Heavy debris from the tires was sprayed upward; the heaviest piece of rubber weighed 9 pounds. 
Then one or two fuel tanks, directly above the tire, were ruptured, causing a massive leak and dramatic flames. 
Investigators are still trying to determine the origin of the metal strip. 
Airport authorities say the runway was checked just hours before the plane took off. 
France's Accident Investigation Bureau said the metal strip, later found at the side of the runway at Roissy-Charles de Gaulle Airport, fitted the shape of a cut in one of the tires and "it is probable that this piece (of metal) caused the cut.
" 
"According to a process which has yet to be determined, one or several fuel tanks on the left wing were very rapidly damaged, causing a major fuel leak and the fire," a statement said. 
It was the Accident Investigation Bureau's first clear scenario for the disaster, and French Transport Ministry officials, aviation experts and investigators met Friday to review the probe findings.
The airliner crashed in flames into a hotel in the town of Gonesse minutes after taking off for New York on July 25; All 109 people on board and four on the ground were killed. 
"If the scenario seems to be becoming clearer, for example as concerns the reasons for the burst tire, uncertainties remain over the chronology of the chain of events as well as on particular elements, such as the source and size of the fire," the Frency ministry statement said. 
French Transport Minister Jean-Claude Gayssot has said the Air France Concordes will not fly again until experts understand exactly what caused the accident. 
At the same time, a report in the British New Scientist raised questions about the needle-nosed jet's engines.
According to the publication, a 1998 study commissioned by British Airways shows 55 "significant risks" inherent in the design of the Concorde engines. 
The report says some of those risks could lead to problems such as uncontrolled fire and multiple engine failure, both of which befell the Concorde in last month's accident . 
British Airways and Air France stress that the engines satisfy the requirements of civil aviation authorities in France, Britain and the United States. 
But British Airways and Rolls Royce, the engine's manufacturer, are halfway through a program to repair the most serious risks.
And CBS News Correspondent Elaine Cobbe reports, one-quarter of the risks involve redesigning some engine parts still in use in both British Airways and Air France fleets.
Half the risks needed "further analysis." 
The program was begun immediately after the completion of the study, according to a paper given to a meeting of the Confederation of European Aerospace Societies last year. 
Copyright 2000, CBS Worldwide.
All Rights Reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
Reuters Limited and The Associated Press contributed to this report.
Police chief Bernard Parks slammed the defendant in this city's next high-profile court drama as a terrorist disguising herself as a soccer mom Wednesday, just six weeks before the trial of former radical fugitive Sara Jane Olson. 
Olson is accused of planting bombs under police cars in Los Angeles 25 years ago as a member of the now-defunct Symbionese Liberation Army, the violent radical group famous for kidnapping newspaper heiress Patty Hearst and turning her into one of its "soldiers." 
Parks, at his monthly briefing with reporters, said people should not forget that Olson is accused of planting bombs under two patrol cars 25 years ago that could have killed and maimed people had they gone off. 
The chief, whose leadership has been tested during the city's worst-ever police corruption scandal, displayed a photograph of one of the bombs, which did not explode because of a design flaw, and said it was a "miracle" that the officers and others were not killed. 
"This is not a crime of trying to blow up police cars, this is a crime of trying to kill Los Angeles police officers," Parks said, adding that only the "quick reaction" by those cops saved their lives and the lives of innocent bystanders. 
Parks said the crimes should not be forgotten simply because Olson was "trying to remake herself into a Midwestern wife and actress (instead of) an SLA terrorist." 
In addition, the chief declared himself furious that Olson's Web site posted the names and addresses of a current and former Los Angeles police officers. 
Parks said he was "outraged" that the names and addresses of Officer John Hall and former Officer James Bryan whose squad car was targeted by one of the bombs were posted on the site, as part of a legal motion. 
He said the posting placed the two men and their families in danger and was evidence of Olson's "defiance" of the law. 
Earlier this month, Los Angeles Superior Court Judge James Ideman refused a request by prosecutors to raise Olson's bail because of the Internet posting, saying he had no evidence that she was personally responsible. 
Olson's San Francisco-based lead attorney, J. Tony Serra, was in court and could not be reached to respond on Parks' remarks.
The organizers of the Web page did not immediately return calls seeking comment. 
Prosecutors say the former Kathleen Ann Soliah planted the bombs, which were packed with nails, in 1975 to avenge the deaths of six SLA members during a shootout with LAPD officers. 
She eluded police and spent nearly a quarter century on the lam, living much of that time in an ivy-covered home in St. Paul, Minn., married to an emergency room doctor, raising three daughters and being active in her church and local theater. 
After her arrest in June, 1999, she legally changed her name to her alias of Sara Jane Olson.
She is scheduled to stand trial beginning January 8. 
The SLA is best known for kidnapping Hearst, who then joined the group and was convicted of helping them rob a bank, spending two years in prison before U.S. President Jimmy Carter granted her clemency. 
Prosecutors have said they will call Hearst as a witness at Olson's trial despite her stated reluctance. 
Grand jury transcripts in the case show there is little evidence left to link Olson to the long-ago bomb plot, and defense lawyers say there never was a case against her.
But prosecutors say there is enough to go forward with a trial. 
Key witnesses have died, and some physical evidence is unavailable. 
Copyright 2000 Reuters Limited.
All Rights Reserved.
There actually appears to be a bit less criticism in Washington about Mr. Bush's strategy than Mr. Clinton's.
Mr. Bush has benefited from Mr. Reagan's and Mr. Clinton's success in paving the way, but Mr. Bush has also played it smart with the Beltway crowd.
He made the obligatory pilgrimage to the Georgetown soiree of The Washington Post 's Kay Graham and her "A" list.
And, rather than lecturing them on the evils of the Washington as Mr. Clinton did to their horror in 1992, he said how honored he was to be there, invoked his mom and dad, and mainly schmoozed big time.
His staff is also a bit more deferent.
Jeff Eller, who had Tucker Eskew's job with Mr. Clinton, publicly delighted in telling the White House press corps he was going around them.
Mr. Eskew refers to them as being a part of "one big mission." 
And then there's Dick Cheney.
There's nothing Washington likes more than someone who's been here before.
And, as Cheney constantly points out, this is his fourth tour of duty.
It was Cheney who put together the budget (with a small group of powerful advisors "with little hands on involvement of the President" according to The Washington Post ) and Cheney who stays on top of foreign policy.
Cheney told the National Association of Manufacturers this week that he has an "informal weekly lunch" with Secretary of State Colin Powell, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, and National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice to coordinate foreign affairs. 
The buzz during the transition was that Cheney's dominance was making Mr. Bush look weak and irrelevant.
But the Bushies say this doesn't worry W. at all.
And maybe he's right to relax.
A CBS Poll question on whether Mr. Bush is really running the country turned in his favor this week, at least among people who watched his first prime-time speech.
61 percent of those who watched now think that he'll be in charge of what goes on in his administration, while 39 percent say other people will be running the country.
However, among the non-viewers, 40 percent believe "Bush is in charge," compared to 60 percent who say "other people" would be in charge. 
The Bushies are betting, however, that some of those non-viewers will be watching the weather and sports in Fargo and Winnetka when the president comes to town, will hear "unfettered" about how wonderful he'll make their schools and their bank accounts, and won't worry too much about who's in charge, either.
Three former drug company executives accused of selling blood products tainted with the virus that causes AIDS were convicted Thursday and given brief prison terms. 
The convictions were the first in a wide-ranging tainted blood scandal that shook Japan's powerful bureaucracy and pharmaceutical industry in the 1980s.
About 1,800 hemophiliacs were infected, and an estimated 500 have died. 
The three were top executives of the company at the center of the scandal, Green Cross Corp.
They were tried over the AIDS-related death of a liver patient. 
Renzo Matsushita, 79, Tadakazu Suyama, 72, and Takehiko Kawano, 69, were accused of permitting the sale of unheated blood-clotting agents known to carry the risk of infection with HIV. 
All three pleaded guilty in 1997.
Matsushita -- a former Health and Welfare Ministry official -- was given a two-year prison term, Suyama received 18 months and Kawano 16 months, said Osaka District Court spokesman Mikinori Kobayashi. 
Some critics were disappointed at the short prison terms. 
Ryuhei Kawada, a hemophiliac infected with HIV from tainted blood products and one of the plaintiffs in a civil suit against Green Cross, said the punishment was insufficient.
"I cannot but feel anger," he told reporters. 
The scandal triggered public outrage against the drug industry and government officials charged with regulating it, and resulted in the prosecution of a former bureaucrat and an adviser to the government on AIDS policy.
No decisions have been reached in those cases. 
The scandal centered on the company's failure to heat-treat imported blood products despite the widespread knowledge at the time that untreated blood could transmit HIV. 
By 1985, the government already had approved safe, heat-treated coagulants, but Green Cross continued to sell its supplies because it faced losing money by dumping its inventory of untreated products. 
The three defendants approved the sale of unsterilized blood products in March 1985 and did not recall the products even after the company began selling heated agents in January 1986. 
At the time of the sales in question, Matsushita was president of the company, Suyama was vice president and Kawano was chief of the company's drug production. 
"We take the ruling seriously, and we will do our utmost not to cause damage by drug products again," Kyodo News agency quoted the company as saying in a statement. 
Green Cross has paid a total of $216 million in compensation to victims and bereaved families after legal battles and subsequent court-mediated settlements. 
Hundreds of hemophiliacs filed damage suits against the company, five pharmaceutical companies and the government for their infection with HIV via tainted blood products. 
2000
The Associated Press.
All Rights Reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
The mission to recover remains from a sunken Russian nuclear submarine has turned up a second note on a sailor's body, Deputy Prime Minister Ilya Klebanov said Wednesday, according to the Interfax news agency. 
The note was written shortly after the submarine Kursk sank to the bottom of the Barents Sea on Aug. 12, crippled by explosions, with 118 men aboard, Klebanov told the commission investigating the sinking, the report said. 
It was not clear if the note contained information that would help determine the cause of the accident.
But, like a previous note found on a sailor's body, it gives a terse description of the trapped sailors' desperation. 
"The general feeling is bad ... the pressure is increasing ... we can't last more than a day," the note says in part, according to Interfax. 
The note was found on the body of a sailor in the submarine's stern compartment, where the other note also was recovered.
That note told of how 23 sailors had crowded into the compartment but were unable to get out the compartment's escape hatch. 
Klebanov said that pictures taken of the submarine during the operation to recover bodies has produced new evidence supporting the theory that the accident was caused by a collision with another vessel, possibly a foreign one, news reports said. 
The evidence includes videotape footage showing a dent in the submarine's upper section, he said.
But Klebanov said other possible causes of the accident are being considered and that no final determination had yet been made. 
Russian officials have said the disaster was most likely caused by a collision, pointing to the presence of foreign military vessels in the Barents Sea during the military exercises in which the Kursk was taking part. 
Both Britain and the United States had submarines in the Barents Sea, but deny their vessels were in the area of the Kursk.
Other observers have said the sinking most likely was caused by a torpedo exploding in a tube. 
The sinking was a trauma for Russia, both because the demise of one of its most modern vessels underlined the cash-strapped Navy's troubles and because of the government's slow and apparently confused response. 
Russia held off for days on accepting foreign offers of help even as its own divers struggled ineffectually to open the Kursk's escape hatch.
Norwegian divers eventually opened it within hours of arriving on the scene, but found the submarine filled with water. 
Only 12 bodies have been recovered and further attempts were called off due to risks to the divers from mangled metal and darkness inside the submarine. 
The commission investigating the accident will decide if recovery efforts will continue. 
President Vladimir Putin, subject to fierce criticism after an initial slow reaction to the accident, had promised that all bodies would be retrieved before the vessel is raised next year. 
The first note found on the body of a victim, that of Dmitry Kolesnikov, state that at least 23 sailors survived for a time in the Kursk's rearmost ninth section after the accident. 
That overturned official assurances that all on board had died immediately after the explosions. 
Copyright 2000 CBS Worldwide Inc.
All Rights Reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
The Associated Press and Reuters Limited contributed to this report.
U.S. District Judge Colleen Kollar-Kotelly agreed to review the settlement and gave states involved in the case until Tuesday to decide if they would accept the plan. 
"I will applaud the effort to come to an agreement ... in this time of rapid national change," the judge said, alluding to her earlier plea for the rival sides to settle their case in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. 
The Redmond, Wash.-based software giant, credited with helping drive the technology revolution of the last decade, would be prohibited from entering exclusivity deals with computer sellers that disadvantaged competitors, the government said. 
The settlement imposes a "broad range of restrictions that will stop Microsoft's unlawful conduct," the Justice Department said, hailing a deal many hope will invigorate the slumping economy and the technology industry. 
Microsoft urged the states to accept the plan.
Company lawyer John Warden called the agreement "good for the parties, and for consumers as we fully expect the states will conclude." 
He added the "greatest beneficiary is the national interest." 
Phil Beck, a private lawyer representing the Justice Department, outlined a three-month process for reviewing the deal and winning final approval from the court.
There would be 60 days for the public to weigh in with comments. 
Beck said the government was confident "that at the end of this period the court will rule the settlement is in the public interest." 
Brendan Sullivan, a lawyer representing the 18 states that joined Justice in suing Microsoft for antitrust violations in 1998, said his clients needed until Tuesday to review the terms and "be sure that this is a good agreement that is enforceable." 
Kollar-Kotelly accepted the settlement under advisement and ordered the parties to return to court Tuesday. 
The restrictions would be imposed for five years, and could be extended for another two years if Microsoft failed to follow the terms, the government said. 
Microsoft would also allow a panel of three independent experts to reside on its premises and work full-time to ensure the software giant complied with the settlement, Justice officials said.
The experts would have access to the programming code that is the blueprint of Microsoft's Windows software. 
"These experts will have full access to all of Microsoft's books, records, systems and personnel, including source code, and will help resolve disputes about Microsoft's compliance," the department said. 
The deal, if approved, would bring to end a historic antitrust case in which the American icon credited with helping driving the computer revolution was judged to be an illegal monopoly that thwarted competition. 
The proposed settlement marks a sudden shift in a case that began under the Clinton administration, which sought to break Microsoft into two for its antitrust violations. 
A judge originally agreed to do that, but the breakup was reversed by a federal appeals court this summer.
The Bush administration took the breakup off the table before starting negotiations this fall. 
President Bush has long urged a settlement in the case but the White House remained on the sidelines during the final days of negotiations led by Justice Department antitrust chief Charles James. 
Critics complained the deal doesn't go far enough to ensure Microsoft won't engage in the same practices that led to the monopoly charges.
Government officials countered it would prohibit the software giant from entering into exclusive deals with computer sellers to squeeze out rival products. 
James said the deal would also "promote innovation, give consumers more choices and provide the computer industry as a whole with more certainty in the marketplace." 
Microsoft will be required to provide software developers with interfaces for its browser, e-mail programs, media players and other Windows additions so that rival developers can write programs that work with those features. 
The settlement would also require non-Microsoft Internet server software to work with Windows on a personal computer just as well as Microsoft servers do. 
And Microsoft must license its operating system to key computer makers for five years and can't require manufacturers to exclusively support Microsoft software.
The company will also be prohibited from retaliating against companies that support competing products. 
Senior Justice lawyers and Microsoft executives decided to press forward without full cooperation from their state partners in the case and to present the deal to Kollar-Kotelly.
She has strongly urged the sides to settle since taking over the complex case in August. 
Lawyers for the states pressured their federal counterparts unsuccessfully this week to seek tougher penalties.
Some states also argued Microsoft can't be trusted to abide by promises to reform its business practices.
The current case stems from charges that the company violated a related 1995 agreement with the Justice Department. 
James similarly lobbied states individually to break from the group.
None did.
Iowa, Connecticut, Wisconsin and California were among the most resistant to any immediate settlement, along with Ohio and Kansas. 
If states decide to reject the settlement, they could object during upcoming public hearings in an effort to scuttle the deal, or they could decide to pursue the case separately in court. 
But legal experts cautioned it was unclear how effectively states could influence terms during consideration by the trial judge, since she has expressed such strong desire for a settlement.
A Russian-made space module launched two weeks ago docked late Tuesday with the International Space Station, an important step in a project already running two years behind in construction. 
The Zvezda module snapped into place with two other space station components, Zarya and Unity, which were launched in 1998.
The first crew then could go to the station in October, reports CBS News Space Consultant Bill Harwood. 
The international space station is running two years behind schedule, and already has gone $3 billion over budget because of problems on the Russian side that raised questions about Moscow's reliability as a partner.
Zvezda was the first module to be built solely by the Russians. 
Russian space officials tried to put that all behind them on Wednesday. 
"I want to wish you all that we will see such events happen again without any more delays," said Yuri Semyonov, head of the state RKK Energiya company, which built the module. 
Russian Aerospace Agency chief Yuri Koptev used the occasion to press for more state funding, noting that the government had provided only about 30 percent of the money needed for each launch. 
"This event shows that Russia is still strong and developing as a superpower and the government should support us," he said at Korolyov. 
Shortly after docking, Zvezda's solar arrays were to begin tracking the sun.
Within a few days, its computers will take full control of maintaining the station's orbit. 
The space laboratory, a massive 16-nation project headed by the United States, will not be complete for another five years, after more than 40 space flights. 
Some members of the U.S.
Congress have questioned whether to fund NASA's spending projections on the $60 billion project, particularly after the failed launches of two Mars missions last year.
But they expressed cautious optimism about the Zvezda launch. 
As the station expands, many of the module's functions will be taken over by other components, but Zvezda will remain the heart of the Russian segments.
Once the ISS is complete, it will weigh about one million pounds and have six laboratories. 
Docking ports for future U.S.-built modules are already in place, so any Russian delays will hold up only the Russian part of the station. 
A key mission is scheduled for early October, when a shuttle will bring the first piece of the girder-like truss assembly that will hold giant solar panels. 
The first live-in crew is to arrive in October or early November aboard a Russian Soyuz vehicle, and a November shuttle flight will follow with solar panels that will dramatically increase the electricity supply. 
That is expected to pave the way for the U.S.-built Destiny science module, the center of the station's research activity, to arrive in January, 2001. 
U.S. President Ronald Reagan set the ISS program in motion in 1984.
Nine years later, with the project in turmoil, President Bill Clinton invited the Russians to join. 
However, instead of saving the U.S. time and money as hoped, the Russians caused even more delays and created even bigger expenses for NASA. 
In the event the automatic linkup with the ISS went awry, two cosmonauts were on standby to launch on Aug. 10 from the Baikonur space facility - Russia's rocket launch site - and fly immediately to Zvezda aboard a Soyuz rocket. 
NASA had hoped the modified docking procedure, in which the space station approached the passive Zvezda module, would help avoid anything similar to the disastrous collision in 1997 between a Russian re-supply ship and the Mir space station.
Cosmonauts attempted to manually maneuver the ship into the loading dock of the Mir station when it careened into a Mir module and into several solar panels causing millions in damage. 
Russia and the United States are investing high hopes in the Zvezda module, the core of the $60 billion, 16-nation space station project.
Without the module, no crews could be sent up to the station, because Zvezda will contain the flight controls, sewage system and living quarters. 
NASA workers have created a World Wide Web site to help stargazers track the International Space Station, the orbiting laboratory being built in space. 
The site, developed at Marshall Space Flight Center and linked from NASA's Liftoff to Exploration Web site, allows Internet surfers to plug in their zip code and find out the best time to view the station.
In her latest Political Points commentary, CBS News Senior Political Editor Dotty Lynch covers Bill Clinton's return to Washington. 
"Not only that, we grow the biggest watermelons in the world." 
Those were the first words Hillary Rodham heard Bill Clinton speak at Yale Law School in 1970.
And that same tone of wonder, excitement and braggadocio were in his voice Thursday in his first speech in Washington since the long goodbye in January. 
"I'm so excited about the future that I'd almost be willing to give up my presidency to get a chance to live to see what's going to happen," said Mr. Clinton.
He went on to talk about technology's ability to find cancer cells so early that "the whole idea of cancer will probably go away," and digital chips which could be inserted to disabled people's spines like heart pacemakers which will enable them "to just get up and walk." 
Mr. Clinton was supposed to address the luncheon crowd of media executives and students attending a conference on "Race and the Press" by Harvard's Joan Shorenstein Center, but his remarks went far afield.
They were an amalgam of his accomplishments on race relations, the downside and promise of globalization, and the good work of an AIDS clinic "in my neighborhood in Harlem."
He rambled a bit, but the optimism, complexity and calculation were all still there. 
"I'm glad, I think, to be back," he began.
He looked slimmer and more rested, and seemed determined not to make any news as he dipped a toe back into the Washington cesspool.
Brother Roger is the most recent Clinton to be investigated by Rep. Dan Burton and the former president sidestepped the inevitable questions.
After the speech he went to lunch with Steven Spielberg and then to a DNC Gala where he received a big ovation and upstaged the original guest of honor, Sen. Joe Lieberman. 
Burned by the tidal wave of venom that followed the Marc Rich pardon, Mr. Clinton went underground from Washington and the news media.
However, he has been extremely active over the last five months.
In conjunction with a series of $100,000-plus speeches (which could earn him about $4 million this year), he has done a significant amount of traveling, spending as many as 25 days a month on the road.
The groups have ranged from the Hotel Owners Association in Atlantic City to a literary festival in east Wales, with the most lucrative gigs apparently being outside the U.S.
And while some snooty Westchester clubs have resisted his membership, he has played golf everywhere else, including St. Andrews in Scotland and Ballybunion in Ireland. 
His office is eager, however, to stress the trips he made in April and May as illustrative of his real priorities.
They include visits to India to raise money for earthquake victims, to South Africa to address a Civil Society conference with Nelson Mandela and to Nigeria to put the spotlight on AIDS.
In May he opened the Rothermere Institute of Politics at Oxford (which will work with the Clinton Foundation down the road) and took a trip through Northern Ireland to help stimulate the peace process. 
An outline of a plan for his future is starting to emerge.
He plans to move into the $354,000 a year office in Harlem at the end of July and there are discussions among his kitchen cabinet about doing an interview to "get the pardon issue" behind him.
His paid staff is tiny about five people now, including a chief of staff and press secretary.
The yearly budget from the government for staff is only $150,000, thus Mr. Clinton and his foundation will have to pay the lion's share of the salaries.
The presidential library in Little Rock is almost back on track and they hope to raise a whopping $200 million in private funds for the library and its programs.
City Year, an offshoot of AmeriCorps, is one of his pet projects and this fall it will sponsor and train international fellows in Northern Ireland, the Middle East and the Balkans. 
Mr. Clinton hopes to have a book deal set "sometime in the next few months" according to his agent Bob Barnett.
Barnett said there are a "multitude of offers, both foreign and domestic," and claims no publisher has asked whether the book will go into the former president's personal life.
They just want a book that is "full, fascinating and candid," said Barnett, who would not comment on the price.
Others have reported that they expect him to get even more than the $8 million advance that Hillary landed. 
The tabloids have been screaming that the marriage is kaput and that Hillary "has thrown him out."
But Clinton press secretary Julia Payne says he has gotten a big kick out of being a Senate spouse and even subbed for Hillary in Rochester this spring when she was running late for an event.
They attended the graduation of daughter Chelsea from Stanford in June and presented the cup to the winner of the Belmont Stakes. 
Betsey Wright, a former Clinton aide, once said that Bill Clinton and his mother "shared a unique ability to view the world with rose-colored glasses and wake up each day as if it's a brand new world."
Listening to him Thursday as he started to weave the highlights of his past into some big ideas and excitement for the future, it seemed like he was starting to convince himself that his second act could be even more interesting than the first.
In a week when the situation in Florida was spinning out of control, Florida's Supreme Court did the right thing in calling a time out so everyone could rest and regroup. 
If the court had not stepped in and Florida's Secretary of State Kathleen Harris - who is also co-chairman of the Bush campaign in the Sunshine State - had tried to declare Bush the winner as planned, as television was showing votes still being counted, there would have been chaos - not to mention that Gore's team would surely have contested her action. 
There may be chaos yet, but let's cut to the chase.
This isn't about fairness, it's about winning. 
The Bush team is trying to stop the recount in the heavily Democratic counties because it believes adding in those votes will throw the election and the presidency to Gore. 
Gore's people want to keep the count going for precisely the same reason. 
There is really only one question neither side can answer: who wins if all the votes statewide - in heavy Republican and well as heavy Democratic counties - are recounted by hand. 
Gore has offered to accept the results of such a recount.
If Bush would also agree, perhaps the American people would then accept the result as legitimate. 
I'm not taking sides.
But I can't think of another way to settle it.
Maybe the court will have a better idea.
Let's hope so. 
But I know this: unless Americans believe the presidency was fairly won, it won't be worth a dime to whoever wins it. 
Copyright 2000, CBS Worldwide Inc., All Rights Reserved.
After George W. Bush spoke to the country Wednesday night, I remarked on television that it was the kind of speech that those of us who have followed his career remembered him making before the campaign. 
I always thought Bush was a better candidate than his campaign allowed him to be and he got off to a terrible start. 
An inexperienced staff - terrified that he would commit some kind of gaffe - walled him off from the press and to some extent from the public as John McCain was rolling through New Hampshire playing the press like a banjo.
And why not? 
When McCain rolled right over Bush, the Bush campaign reeled down and right. 
Suddenly, there was Bush at Bob Jones University in South Carolina, emphasizing themes he had hardly given lip service as governor. 
Yes, Bush won South Carolina in a dirty fight, but the mud bath probably cost him Michigan the next week - and may have cost him Michigan and some other key states such as Pennsylvania in the general election. 
Independents were alienated by the right turn into South Carolina and Bush spent the rest of the year trying to steer back to the middle. 
By Wednesday night, he was clearly there, but already the "my way or no way" crowd is trying to force him back to the right. 
If he is able to resist and isolate them, he'll find a middle ground occupied by friends, allies and - if I may say so - most of the American people. 
It won't be easy, but only from there and with them can he hope to get anything done. 
Copyright 2000, CBS Worldwide Inc., All Rights Reserved.
Radio commentator Rush Limbaugh told listeners Monday that he's virtually deaf but that he wants to continue his nationally syndicated talk show. 
Limbaugh said he noticed in May that he had trouble hearing in his left ear.
He said it had progressively worsened to the point where he is totally deaf in that ear.
He has partial hearing in his right ear, he said. 
"I can occasionally talk to people in person one on one if their voice frequency happens to fit the range that I can still hear, but I cannot hear radio," he said.
"I cannot hear television.
I cannot hear music.
I am, for all practical purposes, deaf - and it's happened in three months." 
This summer, Limbaugh renewed his contract with the Premiere Radio Networks through 2009, reportedly for the highest price ever in radio syndication.
Through his call-in show and a 90-second radio commentary, he reaches some 20 million listeners on nearly 600 stations. 
Representatives of Premiere Radio Networks could not immediately be reached for comment Monday. 
Limbaugh, with his legion of like-minded "dittoheads" who listen to his show live on weekdays from noon to 3 p.m., is an icon in conservative politics who spent most of the 1990s assailing then-President Clinton.
He was frequently lampooned from the left: Comedian Al Franken wrote a book titled "Rush Limbaugh is a Big Fat Idiot," before Limbaugh lost weight. 
The 50-year-old Limbaugh got his start on KFBK in Sacramento, Calif., in 1985 and became nationally syndicated in 1988. 
Limbaugh said his hearing loss is not genetic.
He said doctors have a theory about why he's gone deaf, "but I'm going to keep that to myself." 
The commentator told listeners, "you would not believe the medication that is flowing through me in an attempt to reverse this." 
He said he wants to continue his show, and is experimenting with ways that he can still communicate with telephone callers.
If that doesn't work, he may do the show without callers. 
"All I've lost is my ability to hear," he said, "but it doesn't mean I've lost my ability to communicate.
Those are two different things, given the technological advances we have in this country today." 
He had a syndicated television talk show that lasted four years and ended in 1996.
CNN, which Limbaugh frequently derided as the "Clinton News Network," talked briefly about putting him on the air this summer, but nothing came of the discussions. 
Limbaugh also briefly sought a color commentator job on "Monday Night Football," but the gig went to Dennis Miller. 
He said Monday that many of his listeners had written to say that his voice had changed in recent months. 
"It could well be that my voice is changing," he said.
"I don't know.
I cannot hear myself well enough to know."
American Red Cross President Bernadine Healy, one of the few medical doctors to lead the influential and popular charity, is resigning her post at year's end after two years on the job. 
"The decision to leave a great job at one of America's most admired institutions has not been an easy one," Healy said, saying she would retire effective Dec. 31. 
"But having directed the American Red Cross through its finest hours following the Sept. 11 attacks, and having served as a change agent over the past two years to initiate needed reform in its key programs, the time now seems right for new challenges in my own career." 
Healy, a CBS News consultant, gave no official reason for leaving, but alluded to two of the many controversies that have filled her tenure, including Israel's exclusion from full membership of the International Red Cross and how to spend the more than $450 million raised to help victims of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. 
Regarding that fund, "I strongly oppose commingling of the moneys with any other Red Cross disaster funds," she said, saying, "reasonable people can differ." 
Healy also said she had withheld administrative dues to the Red Cross' parent in Geneva over the Israel controversy, calling it a "controversial but principled stand." 
"This policy is now up for grabs," she said.
"Reasonable people have differed with me on this and certainly other matters." 
Healy took the helm of the nation's largest charity on Sept. 1, 1999, succeeding Elizabeth Dole, who resigned to seek the Republican presidential nomination. 
In the days following the Sept. 11 attacks, Healy was often in the public eye.
She appeared at the White House by President Bush's side and on TV in public-service announcement urging Americans to donate blood or money in the tragedy's aftermath. 
Healy rankled other charities collecting money for Sept. 11 victims by refusing to go along with a coordinated effort led by the New York attorney general to keep track of how much money was being given to each family. 
Her role was controversial, as many blood experts argued it was wrong to encourage blood donations when they were not needed to treat victims of the terrorist attacks.
Critics worried that over-collections in the days following the attacks would force the Red Cross to discard blood that expired before it could be used. 
This week, the Red Cross acknowledged that about 4.5 percent of the red blood cells collected on Sept. 11 just expired, and 6 percent collected on Sept. 12 was expected to expire.
Typically, 2.5 percent of red blood cells expire 42 days after they are collected.
But Red Cross officials insisted that no one's donation went to waste because plasma or other products from every donation, beyond red cells, was used. 
Healy's tenure also has been marked by controversy surrounding Red Cross policies over who can donate blood and what measures must be taken to ensure its safety. 
She was unable to free the organization from a court-ordered consent decree with the Food and Drug Administration over repeated violations of blood safety rules.
Although the consent decree was in place when Healy took over the Red Cross, the FDA fight has escalated in recent months as the agency attempted to charge the Red Cross millions of dollars in fines. 
She also took on the FDA last summer by pushing to restrict blood donations from anyone who had made even brief visits to Britain and Europe for fear of mad cow disease.
The FDA plans to enact restrictions, but they are not nearly as stringent and strongly cautioned Healy that her organization should not imply to the public that its blood is safer than that collected by blood banks following the FDA rules. 
Healy, a cardiologist, was the first woman to head the National Institutes of Health.
Her tenure there from 1991 to 1993 was also controversial. 
At NIH, she launched a major study on women's health and pressed to have women and minorities included in all clinical trials at a time when most medical studies focused on white men. 
In 1994, she made an unsuccessful bid for the U.S. Senate from Ohio before going to Ohio State University to serve as dean of the school's College of Medicine and Public Health. 
A native of Queens, N.Y., Healy, 57, earned her bachelor's degree from Vassar College in 1965 and medical degree from the Harvard School of Medicine in 1970. 
She completed postgraduate work at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and was a member of the Hopkins faculty from 1976 to 1984. 
Healy was chosen in 1984 by President Reagan to be deputy director of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy.
From 1985 to 1991, she was chairwoman of the Cleveland Clinic Foundation. 
The American Red Cross, with an annual budget of more than $2 billion, collects blood, organizes relief efforts around the world and trains volunteers in lifesaving skills. 
The organization's board of governors will appoint an interim chief executive at a later date, said Red Cross spokeswoman Blythe Kubina.
Saudi Arabia's Defense Minister Prince Sultan said in remarks published on Sunday that the kingdom, a key U.S. ally, will not allow foreign forces to launch attacks from its territory against Arabs or Muslims. 
The Arabic-language Okaz newspaper said Prince Sultan dismissed as "nonsense" reports that the oil-rich kingdom would allow U.S. forces to launch military action from a U.S. base on its territory against Afghanistan. 
"We do not accept the presence in our country of a single soldier at war with Muslims or Arabs," it quoted the minister as saying during a visit to the northern Qassim region. 
Prince Sultan's reported remarks were the first made by a senior Saudi official following conflicting recent reports on whether the kingdom would allow the United States to use its territory to launch attacks in reprisal for the September 11 suicide attacks in New York and Washington. 
But Sultan's comments may have been for domestic consumption. 
U.S. officials, speaking on condition of anonymity Friday, said they have received tacit assurances that Saudi Arabia will allow U.S. troops to use a command center at a base in Saudi Arabia as a staging ground for military action against exiled Saudi dissident Osama bin Laden, who is thought to be harbored by the Taliban regime in Afghanistan. 
The two sides might be able to find a compromise through which U.S. forces direct attacks on Afghanistan from a command center in Saudi Arabia, but use forces launched from other locations. 
The United States has warned Afghanistan's ruling Taliban of reprisals for not handing over Saudi-born dissident Osama bin Laden, Washington's top suspect in the attacks. 
The U.S. military presence in the kingdom is sensitive to Muslims - it is one of the reasons bin Laden has declared war on the United States.
Saudi officials have in the past dealt with the problem by simply denying there is a U.S. military presence in their nation. 
Prince Sultan said the situation was now different from 1990-1991 when Saudi Arabia was a launching pad for the U.S.-led military coalition that ended Iraq's occupation of Kuwait. 
Okaz quoted Prince Sultan as saying that 40 French, British and U.S. aircraft were in the kingdom to monitor southern Iraq under a U.N. Security Council decision following the Gulf War. 
About 4,500 U.S. soldiers and an undisclosed number of U.S. warplanes involved in the patrols are based at the Prince Sultan Air Base in al-Kharj, a vast compound in a remote stretch of desert south of Riyadh, the capital. 
The Washington Post has said Riyadh signaled it would allow U.S. aircraft stationed at Prince Sultan Air Base to launch attacks on Afghanistan.
The Post had previously said the Saudis were resisting a U.S. request to use a new command center there. 
The Saudi ambassador to Britain Ghazi al-Gosaibi told Reuters on Wednesday that Washington was aware the kingdom, the birthplace of Islam, could not be directly involved in strikes on fellow Muslims in Afghanistan. 
Saudi Arabia has pledged support for an international coalition U.S. President George W. Bush is building against "terrorism.
" It has also severed ties with the Taliban for refusing to hand over bin Laden. 
The Saudi English-language Arab News daily said in an editorial on Sunday that the Washington Post and foreign news agencies "are either unaware of the kingdom's policies or attitudes or they are aiming to embarrass the kingdom by malicious propaganda that suggests the kingdom is part of military action." 
"The kingdom's participation in combating terrorism is and will be consistent and compatible with its beliefs, policies and best judgments.
Only Saudi air space will be used as our contribution.
but the kingdom's soil will not be used as a base for any military operations," the newspaper said. 
Praising the White House for restraint in its response to the attacks on New York and Washington, former President Bill Clinton and one-time presidential hopeful Bob Dole announced on Saturday a major effort to provide scholarships for victims' families. 
The former political adversaries, each with an American flag pin pinned to his lapel, stood shoulder to shoulder at a news conference at Georgetown University, where they said they were chairing an effort to raise $100 million for college and trade school scholarships.
The money would go to needy children and spouses of the 6,500 feared dead in the attacks as well as survivors of those who suffered disabling injuries. 
Afghanistan-based Osama bin Laden, Washington's top suspect in the suicide hijacking attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. 
"I agree that we should not intentionally bring violence to innocent civilians, even in Afghanistan, but it's obvious that the president and the national security team are trying to avoid that," Clinton said. 
"I think I can speak for all Americans in saying I have been very impressed by the fact that they have told us the truth, that these were difficult decisions, the tactical decisions are difficult, and they didn't go off and try to get vengeance and carelessly cost a lot of lives from people who can't help the fact that they're trapped in Afghanistan," he said. 
"America has not shown a great of blood lust here, even in New York. ...
Our leaders, I think, are approaching this in a very measured way," he added.
"America has acted like anything but a warmonger in this.
We're just trying to do the right thing long-term against a very serious threat." 
Dole, the Kansas Republican who sought the presidency for much of his Senate career and lost to Clinton in the 1996 election, said he agreed. 
"There has been a demonstration of prudence and patience.
We have no desire to harm, kill or otherwise cause any problems for innocent victims anywhere.
That's always been the American thinking," Dole said. 
He added, however: "Collateral damage will probably happen.
Some of it you can't avoid." 
"I understand there were some urging an immediate response - do it now, make you feel good.
But that was declined, fortunately, and I think now we're on the proper path," he said. 
The effort Dole and Clinton will chair is called the Families of Freedom Scholarship Fund.
It has already raised $3 million to $5 million, with promises of millions more, those involved in the effort said. 
The fund is controlled by the Minnesota-based Citizens Scholarship Foundation, a group that supports and manages private-sector scholarships.
The foundation said every dollar contributed would go to scholarships, with interest on funds collected being used partly for administrative costs. 
William Nelsen, a former college president who heads the group, said it was impossible to estimate how many scholarships would eventually be handed out
but they would be in the "thousands" and include survivors of both U.S. and foreign nationals affected by the attacks. 
Information on the program is available at 1-800-335-1102. 
Every campaign hits a bump in the road, but over the last couple of weeks it's as if the Bush campaign had suddenly turned onto a road under construction - bumps, loose gravel, everything short of a washed out bridge. 
Six weeks ago, the highway ahead looked so smooth to the Bush people, they could see all the way to victory in November. 
They had raised so much money, Bush had climbed to the top of the polls without really getting specific on what he intended to do as president. 
But then he got himself tangled up in a silly debate over debates, talked into an open mike when he shouldn't have, and his team got caught making a stupid commercial about rats. 
All of it just as Al Gore announced a startling political tactic - he promised to work hard on some issues the polls said people were really concerned about: the high cost of prescription drugs for one. 
As Gore suddenly pulled up in the polls, Republicans turned so gloomy, some seemed ready to concede.
I don't buy it.
There's too much campaign left and Bush has finally started talking about what he intends to do if elected. 
But it's going to be close and it does remind us of two old truths about politics: when it starts to look easy, it usually gets hard - and sooner or later, you have to tell people why you're running. 
Copyright 2000, CBS Worldwide Inc., All Rights Reserved.
California will let pharmacists dispense emergency contraceptive pills without a prescription, becoming the second state to do so. 
The new law, which has no age limit, was signed Sunday by Gov. Gray Davis and takes effect Jan. 1. 
"California is a bellwether state for many other parts of the country," said Jane Boggess, director of the Public Health Institute's Pharmacy Access Partnership. 
The so-called morning-after pill is a high dose of birth control pills taken within 72 hours of unprotected sex to prevent pregnancy. 
Opponents say the law lets pharmacists act beyond their training. 
Christine Thomas, acting executive director of California Right to Life, said the group believes the drug induces abortion and therefore would have opposed the bill even if it had excluded minors. 
Washington state has a similar law.
Eleven other states considered bills related to emergency contraception this year. 
Morning-after pills differ from the so-called abortion pill RU-486, which is for women who already know they are pregnant and want a non-surgical abortion. RU-486 can be used up to seven weeks after the beginning of their last menstrual period. 
Planned Parenthood Affiliates of California, a co-sponsor of the bill, estimates that about half of U.S. pregnancies are unintended, and about half of those will end in abortion.
Following The Hudson?
Flight Attendants Call Supervisors
What Were The Passengers Thinking? 
48 Hours reports what really happened during the flight. 
Three of the five suspected hijackers on board were sitting in business class.
The other two were in first class.
According to the FBI, suspected ringleader Mohammed Atta had a boarding pass for a seat across the aisle from David Angell and his wife.
Angell was the executive producer of "Frasier."
Another terrorist sat next to Atta, and another in seat 10B.
The hijacking itself likely began about 15 minutes into the flight. 
"It sounds like they attacked a passenger to cause a commotion," says Tom Roger. 
There are first-hand reports of what happened on the plane because two flight attendants, Amy Sweeney and Betty Ong, grabbed phones and called supervisors on the ground.
The FBI and American Airlines told families what they said. 
Tom Roger learned a lot from what he was told about Amy Sweeney's call: "What she was reporting is that the hijackers had attacked a passenger and either killed him or cut his throat.
They had also attacked the two flight attendants who were in First Class." 
Karen Martin was one of those flight attendants.
"I know she went down fighting," says her brother, Paul Martin.
The Martin family was also told details of Amy Sweeney s call.
The Martins say that they have been told that Sweeney said that Karen Martin had been stabbed and was on oxygen. 
Paul Martin believes his sister put herself between the hijackers and the cockpit. 
"She would defend her whole life to save that cockpit door because you don t want them to get control of that," he says.
"And she would not let them in.
I know she went down fighting
and she would never give up easily.
Even though she s 5' 8", she has as much feistiness in her as Muhammed Ali or any type of hero." 
Flight attendant Betty Ong was still on the phone and reports hijackers had knives and some sort of gas that she thought was mace.
On the ground, air traffic controllers were trying to reach Flight 11.
They radioed Captain Ogonowski, telling him to climb to a higher altitude.
There was no response. 
Air traffic controllers were getting more concerned.
Flight 11 made a sharp turn over Albany, N.Y. and headed south, radically off course.
Then the radar transponder that sends vital information about altitude and speed was shut off.
The controllers tried repeatedly to reach the plane, without response. 
Suddenly the Captain s microphone begins transmitting and the controllers overheard a chilling warning to the crew:
"Don't do anything foolish, you're not going to get hurt.
We have more planes.
We have other planes." 
Flight attendant Amy Sweeney was still on the phone with her supervisor.
She told him the hijackers were Middle Eastern, and they d made it to the cockpit.
According to Tom Roger, she reported that the hijackers were in control of the plane and the pilots were either disabled or dead. 
Both Amy and Betty, felt the plane descending.
It's hard to believe but they said that most passengers in the main cabin, far from the cockpit, seemed unaware that anything was wrong. 
Jean Roger's family believes she and the rest of the crew were thinking the terrorists planned to land and negotiate. 
As the plane approaches New York, it slowed down, probably so it could maneuver into its target.
It was still flying at more than 300 miles per hour.
Betty Ong and Amy Sweeney remained on the phone with American Airlines as they flew towards the World Trade Center.
To the people on the ground, they sounded calm.
But at a certain point, Betty seemed to realize what was happening and asked the people on the phone to pray for Flight 11.
Amy kept the reports coming right until the end. 
The Air Force scrambled two F-15s to find the plane, but by the time they took off, Flight 11 had already hit. 
There is still a lot unknown about what happened on Flight 11.
Jean's brother Jimmy has made peace with the little information there is.
He is comfortable filling in the gaps himsself. 
"I'm comfortable Jean was probably busy ,just doing her job," he says.
"Keep passengers in their seats.
Keep them calm.
Get them ready for any kind of emergency scenarios that they go through.
I would be certain she was doing that.
I don't care if they find the data recorders to disprove my scenario.
They may.
But for now, I d be comfortable knowing just what I know." 
Recently, a memorial service was held for the plane's 11 crew members.
All the families attended.
Part of the service was the birthday card that Jean Roger gave to her boyfriend the night before: "May you have love, happiness, and peace of mind because really, in the end, everything else just comes and goes." 
Her father, Tom, hopes to arm flight crews.
"I think there should be a lethal weapon in the cockpit on the plane," he says.
He is calling for panic alarms and mace for flight attendants, tighter screening of passengers and drastically reducing the number of allowed carry-ons.
Airlines have started making some changes since Sept. 11. 
"There has to be something to come from it.
Otherwise these people really will have died in vain," he says. 
Jim Ogonowski, the brother of Captain Ogonowski has a more focused fight on his hands.
He s a Lieutenant Colonel in the Air National Guard.
Parts of his unit were mobilized after the attack. 
Like all the victims of Sept.11, the crewmembers' families are left to find their own meaning in the death of their loved ones.
They refuse to accept that they died just because a group of desperate men were consumed by hate. 
"One image that people have given me about why Jean was on that flight," her father said, "all those people had to go at that time, who better to lead them over into the other life than our daughter.
My image, our image, is her saying 'Come on, what are you waiting for?
It's time to start again.'"
Terry McAuliffe, the 43-year-old maestro of soft money, has been selected as the new chairman of the Democratic National Committee. 
"With the Republicans holding the White House, the Congress and the courts, the American people are counting on us to get out of our seats and to fight for them!
That's why our cause is so urgent and our time is so precious," he said in an acceptance speech. 
McAuliffe's only opponent Maynard Jackson, the former mayor of Atlanta, withdrew from the race at the last moment, clearing the way for McAuliffe.
Jackson got into the contest at the urging of Maxine Waters and other members of the Congressional Black Caucus and picked up support from a disparate group of reformers and disgruntled Democrats.
Jackson was also backed by the Teamsters Union and campaign finance reformers Bill Bradley and Russ Feingold. 
Bradley and Feingold s opposition to McAulliffe was couched in the argument that it is a terrible symbol for the Democrats to pick as their leader someone whose only political accomplishment has been raising money.
In May of 2000, McAuliffe was so successful in raising $26.5 million for the Democrats that Al Gore called him the "greatest fundraiser in the universe." 
But, beyond being a fundraiser McAuliffe is a quintessential politician.
He is the king of schmooze who works non-stop and who has patted every prominent back in the Democratic Party for the last 20 years.
The Clintons are his most recent friends but he's a prot?g? of former Rep. Tony Coelho and House Democratic Leader Dick Gephardt was in his wedding.
When word got out that Al Gore was miffed that McAuliffe had been designated the heir apparent without his input, McAuliffe stroked Gore and he says they have been talking on the phone ever since.
McAuliffe told the New York Times that Gore is the frontrunner for 2004 though he also gave a wink and a nod to John Kerrey and John Edwards. 
There is a certain irony that the Democrats, who claim to support campaign finance reform and who were stung with scandals from the 1996 fund-raising which McAuliffe engineered, would turn to the king of soft money as their chair.
If McCain-Feingold (which McAuliffe says he supports) were to pass, what would McAuliffe do? 
"Get into the hard money business," says Democracy 21 s Fred Werhteimer.
No problem says the McAuliffe staff.
He "packed the boxes at the MCI Center" in May with hard money (the $50 seats in the peanut gallery as opposed to $500,000 tables on the floor).
They add that he is a big believer in direct mail and wants to sponsor training programs for state parties in fundraising. 
"There was life before soft money," Wertheimer says, and McAuliffe believes he can find a way. 
But it may not be so easy. 
During the Clinton administration the Democrats became quite competitive with the GOP on soft money ($244 million for the Republicans and $243 million for the Democrats in 2000), but trailed far behind in hard money contributions ($447 million for the GOP; $270 million for the Democrats). 
The limit on hard money is $20,000 per individual, and the Republicans have a big head start in building lists of people who can write those checks.
And now they have the White House as bait - even if the Lincoln Bedroom is no longer an option. 
MMI Viacom Internet Services Inc.
All Rights Reserved. 
A spike in gasoline prices in September sent U.S. consumer prices up at the sharpest rate in four months, the Labor Department reported on Friday. 
Energy prices have declined in October, however, and inflation is not considered a major threat to the economy. 
The Consumer Price Index - the broadest available gauge of national inflation - rose at a stronger-than-expected 0.4 percent rate last month following a 0.1 percent August gain. 
The September inflation figures represented the largest monthly gain in consumer prices since a matching 0.4 percent gain in May and exceeded Wall Street economists' forecasts for a 0.3 percent advance. 
But excluding food and energy, consumer prices climbed a more modest 0.2 percent, the same rate as in each of July and August.
Gasoline prices, which had shot up in advance of the Labor Day weekend at the start of the month -- one of the year's busiest driving periods -- were up 8.6 percent in September.
It was the sharpest rise in gasoline prices in more than a year. 
To stabilize the tottering economy, the Federal Reserve has cut interest rates nine times this year, with two of those reductions coming after the Sept. 11 attacks.
One of the reasons the Fed has been able to act so aggressively is because inflation has not been a problem. 
While economists are hopeful that prices will remain stable in the aftermath of the attacks, some worry about price spikes, especially for energy products.
Others are concerned that the Fed's credit easing to support the economy could sow the seeds of inflation down the road. 
During the first nine months of this year, consumer prices rose at an annual rate of 2.8 percent, compared with an increase of 3.4 percent for all of 2000. 
While gasoline costs were up sharply last month, prices for natural gas and electricity fell in September by 5.5 percent and 0.6 percent, respectively. 
Food prices rose for the second month in a row by 0.2 percent in September, reflecting higher prices for vegetables, fruits and pork. 
Those higher prices blunted lower prices for other items. 
Housing costs fell by 0.2 percent in September, the first decline since February 1986 and the biggest drop since December 1982. 
Airlines fares fell by 0.7 percent in September and new car prices were flat. 
In its trade report, the Commerce Department said the August deficit was 7 percent below a July imbalance of $29.2 billion.
The improvement reflected a 1.1 percent drop in imports, the fifth straight monthly decline, and a small 1 percent increase in U.S. exports. 
America's deficit with China surged to $8.1 billion, the highest level since last October, while the deficit with Japan shrank. 
So far this year, the U.S. trade deficit is running at an annual rate of $360 billion, an improvement over the all-time record deficit of $375.7 billion set last year.
A trace amount of anthrax was discovered earlier Friday at the Central Intelligence Agency's mail-handling building at its McLean, Va., headquarters.
A spokesman described the anthrax as "medically insignificant" but said the building was closed for additional tests. 
"It's not enough to cause inhalation anthrax," said spokesman Bill Harlow.
He said several agency employees who handle mail are taking antibiotics as a precaution. 
Also, a test for anthrax in a mailroom in the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research in Silver Spring, Md., came back positive.
The institute, which doesn't care for patients, is three miles from the hospital at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center. 
And in Virginia, a State Department mail handler who works far from previous anthrax-infected sites was hospitalized with the inhaled form of the disease. 
Three weeks into the nation's age of anthrax, the head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said it was all but certain that at least one piece of tainted mail in the nation's capital remained undiscovered. 
It would be "highly unlikely to virtually impossible" for the letter to Daschle to be responsible for the known spread of the spores to mail handling facilities in Washington, Maryland and Virginia, said Dr. Jeffrey Koplan. 
Investigators are continuing their search for a sender but reporting little no progress. 
The White House said Friday that the anthrax sent to Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle last week could have been produced by any microbiologist in a well-equipped lab. 
Press Secretary Ari Fleischer said the spores sent to Daschle were refined and highly concentrated.
But he said analysis showed the material was not the most sophisticated possible. 
Fleischer said this does not rule out production by a terrorist group or foreign government, nor does it eliminate the suspicion that Osama bin Laden and his alleged terrorist network may be responsible. 
Fleischer spoke a day after Homeland Security Chief Tom Ridge reported that the strain of anthrax in the Daschle letter was the same as letters sent to New York and Florida. 
The good news, Ridge said, was that none of the bacteria had been altered genetically, meaning those exposed can be treated with antibiotics. 
The circle of infection widened with the diagnosis of the State Department employee, who worked more than 20 miles from Brentwood, Washington's central mail processing facility.
Until Thursday, all those infected in the nation's capital had been tied to this central plant, which handles mail for federal agencies. 
The 59-year-old man, hospitalized in guarded condition with inhaled anthrax, worked in Sterling, Va., where about 90 percent of the State Department's mail is processed, some of which comes from Brentwood. 
Doctors asked him if his job ever took him to Brentwood. "
His answer was 'never,'" reported Dr. Ivan Walks, Washington's chief health officer. 
A co-worker at the Virginia facility was declared free from anthrax after overnight tests. 
Their workplace was being tested for anthrax exposure Friday, as were 250 to 300 workers, with about 80 of them immediately given preventative antibiotics.
Another half dozen State Department locations also were to be tested, including two inside the Foggy Bottom headquarters. 
The number of confirmed infections reached 13, all linked to the media or the mail, all in Florida, New York, New Jersey or metropolitan Washington. 
Among those with inhalation anthrax, three have died, three are hospitalized and one has recovered.
Another six people have been diagnosed with the highly treatable skin form of the disease. 
Despite the disturbing anthrax news, officials urged calm.
Many lawmakers were returning to their Capitol Hill offices, shuttered for the past week, while others were still shut out as anthrax decontamination continued. 
"We are here to conduct the nation's business.
We will not be frightened," Secretary of State Colin Powell said as he appeared before a Senate committee.
Watching these polls go back and forth, it's fair to say neither Gore nor Bush has captured the nation's imagination.
Not yet, anyway. 
But have you noticed what I've noticed?
That when one of them talks about the issues he seems to edge slightly ahead. 
Think about it.
Bush was ahead and coasting until Gore came out of the Democratic Convention promising to do something about the high cost of prescription drugs and health care - and he took the lead. 
Then Bush started talking about fixing the nation's schools - and he bounced into an ever so slight lead in some polls. 
So why is it
that once either of them gets ahead by talking issues that they veer off into the weird stuff? 
Once he was ahead, Gore reeled off more of those preposterous claims - this time about being present at the creation of the strategic oil reserve, which of course a quick check showed he wasn't. 
Once Bush began making mileage talking education, his own staffers pushed him off the front pages for a week with all that silly ranting about whether there was a Gore mole spying on the Bush campaign staff.
Spare us. 
Here's a tip to both sides: those of us old enough to vote are, by definition, adults. 
We don't cast our votes on the basis of who can tell the tallest tales.
Nor do we have much interest in intramural squabbles over the loyalty of low-level campaign staffers. 
Stick with the serious stuff.
It seems to work for both of you and we're old enough to take it. 
Copyright 2000, CBS Worldwide Inc., All Rights Reserved.
In her latest Political Points commentary, CBS News Senior Political Editor Dotty Lynch takes a look at how changes in the Electoral College could affect the next race for the White House. 
It's an axiom that candidates, like generals, who fight the last war will inevitably lose the next one. 
Such would be the case if the "Gore insiders" quoted in this week's U.S. News and World Report are correct.
In an item predicting that Gore will run again in 2004, these cognoscenti say that he will follow the electoral strategy of 2000 with one exception forget Tennessee and pour money into New Hampshire. 
Sounds good, for if little New Hampshire's four electoral votes had gone to Gore, he would have beaten Bush 271-267 and Florida wouldn't have mattered. 
But there's one big problem with this idea, as Harrison Hickman, Gore's pollster last time, points out. 
The 2000 Census has reapportioned the electoral votes in each state, dropping Gore's 2000 base of 267 votes down to 260.
If the states vote the same way in 2004 as they did in 2000, Bush would beat Gore by 278-260, and New Hampshire's four votes won't matter. 
Eight states will gain a total of 12 electoral votes in 2004: Arizona , California , Colorado , Florida , Georgia , Nevada , North Carolina and Texas .
Of these, Gore won only California. 
And ten states will lose those 12 electoral votes: Connecticut , Illinois , Indiana , Michigan , Mississippi , New York , Ohio , Oklahoma , Pennsylvania and Wisconsin .
Gore won six of those states and can now kiss eight of the 12 electoral votes goodbye. 
Of course, all of this presumes that Bush really did win Florida and that he'd win it again in 2004.
But Bush strategists are by no means taking Florida for granted and they know that 2004 will be different from 2000 in another important respect Hispanic voters.
Because this vote is growing so rapidly, the Bushies have targeted it and say they must exceed the 35 percent he won in 2000.
Matthew Dowd, who coordinates polls for the Bush camp out of the Republican Nation Committee, says that if Bush doesn't improve his standing with minorities, he'll lose the election by 3 million votes, and risk losing Arizona and Colorado, as well as Florida. 
None of these analyses ever question the existence of the Electoral College in 2004.
It's a mystery why all these blue-ribbon panels now looking into electoral reform are avoiding the biggest dinosaur of them all a system that is patently undemocratic and could cause more "illegitimacy" than all those hanging and pregnant chads. 
In their excellent book, "Electoral College Primer 2000,"
Lawrence D. Longley and Neil R. Peirce point out the potentially "disastrous failings of the Electoral College in electing the people's President." 
The winner-take-all system distorts the popular vote in a way that is unfair to voters in 44 of the 50 states.
Why should Al Gore have won all the electoral votes in Iowa, Wisconsin, Oregon and New Mexico, or George W. Bush in Florida when they basically tied in the popular vote? 
This time the electoral vote system worked for Bush but it could have easily tipped the other way for Gore.
A week before the election it looked like Bush would win the popular vote but lose the Electoral College.
What convoluted system caused Bush and Gore to virtually ignore the voters in four of the six most populous states California, Texas, New York and Illinois and spend so much time and money in Washington and Wisconsin? 
Despite the lack of campaigning in the big states, the votes of citizens there do count more.
While the extra two votes each state gets helps to marginally increase the clout of the small states, their votes still matter significantly less to the overall outcome.
One statistical analysis shows that in 2000 the vote of each Californian counted 2.663 times more than the vote of each Montanan.
The argument that the Electoral College helps the small states because candidates wouldn't go there otherwise is negated by statistics and by reality.
Candidates campaign in big swing states and ignore safe, small ones. 
For years the political system has disregarded the will of the American voters who believe that their president like their governor, senator and mayor should be the person who wins the most votes. 
That simple idea is the one we peddle to emerging democracies in Eastern Europe and Latin America.
Maybe it's time for the electoral reformers to go beyond new voting machines and take on something that would really make every vote count. 
MMI Viacom Internet Services Inc.
All Rights Reserved.
It was a price that symbolized a market out of control.
Last January, with California desperate for power, Duke Energy charged $3,800 for a megawatt hour of electricity.
The price last week was down fifty-fold, to $70 an hour. 
"It's working, it's brought prices down, the evidence is there," said Curt Hebert. 
Hebert, the Republican chairman of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), claims a price relief plan he pushed for California gets the credit.
Under so-called "mitigation," prices are limited, set to the most expensive electricity generated that day, reports CBS News Correspondent Wyatt Andrews. 
"Since the plan has gone into effect the prices have been down every day," said Hebert. 
But Bill Massey, a Democratic Commissioner at FERC says the commissioners plan is too little too late.
"We have not been nearly tough enough," he said. 
Massey sides with critics who say FERC has fiddled while California burned allowing months of price gouging by out-of-state traders.
The chairman's price mitigation, he complains, is ineffective partly because it only kicks in during emergencies. 
"It ignores our responsibility to insure just and reasonable prices in all hours.
We have an obligation under federal law to step in forcefully to ensure that prices are just and reasonable every hour of the day and we have failed in that obligation," explained Massey. 
And that's exactly what may happen on Monday.
Under political pressure, FERC will consider extending price mitigation around the clock.
The questions now will be, will the plan have teeth and can it keep the lights on this summer? 
Economist Severin Borenstien calls mitigation a good start but warns there are ways around it. 
"It's a fantasy to think this will solve the problem," he said.
"One way generators can manipulate these rules is simply by taking low cost power off the market.
It's so easy to manipulate these rules that they're not going to have a significant effect this summer." 
Hebert rejects criticism he tolerates price gouging.
Bring hard evidence of manipulation he says, and FERC will act. 
"If there is illegal conduct 24 hours a day 7 days a week this commission is vigilant," said Hebert. 
There's no denying the FERC vote on Monday represents a political reversal.
The same Bush administration that in February was hands-off California, is now pushing to monitor the California market 24/7. 
In her latest Political Points commentary, CBS News Senior Political Editor Dotty Lynch takes a look at the key "off-year" elections. 
On Thursday night, the final debate between the two candidates for mayor of Los Angeles took place in, of all places, the Museum of Tolerance.
Democrats James Hahn, the L.A. city attorney, and Antonio Villaraigosa, speaker of the California Assembly, fired a series of shrill charges, each accusing the other of running a campaign of hypocrisy and smears. 
On June 5, voters will choose between the two Democrats in a run-off election to succeed two-term Republican Mayor Richard Riordan.
Los Angeles is now almost 50 percent Latino, and for a while it looked like Villaraigosa was poised to become the city' first Latino mayor. 
But the rough and tumble of the campaign has featured a devastating ad by Hahn attacking Villaraigosa for writing a letter to President Clinton urging a pardon for convicted drug trafficker Carlos Vignali.
The ad uses visuals of crack cocaine paraphernalia and moved Villaraigosa from a small lead to a deficit of six to 11 points. 
"We had a couple of weeks of gooey-gooey, 'Oh wow, the first Latino mayor,'" a Hahn advisor said.
"And then reality sunk in." 
That reality has been Hahn's gaining the upper hand on the issues of crime and public safety against the more liberal former ACLU president.
But Villaraigosa still has some intense supporters about 22 percent of primary voters will be Latinos who would like to make history, so locals believe that this is still a close contest. 
Los Angeles is one of 462 cities holding mayoral elections this year.
New York City, Detroit and Cleveland will also elect new mayors.
In addition there are races for governor in two states, Virginia and New Jersey, and several special elections for House of Representatives. 
The candidates for mayor in New York are having trouble topping the headlines made by outgoing Mayor Rudy Guiliani and the very public love triangle going on in Gracie Mansion.
Leading in the polls is Democratic Public Advocate Mark Green, although though the primary is not until September 11. 
While Democrats hope to take back the mayoralty in the heavily Democratic city, rich Republican businessman Michael Bloomberg is expected to wage a very expensive campaign. 
Democratic National Chair Terry McAuliffe, already assured that Los Angeles will switch to his party, has been pushing 2001 as the year the Democrats begin a big comeback that will propel them into the 2002 elections, when 36 governorships and control of the Congress will be at stake. 
In fact, the Democrats do have good chances in the two gubernatorial races this year.
Neither of their nominees in New Jersey or Virginia have significant opposition in the primaries, while both states have fractious Republican contests. 
In Virginia this weekend, 8,000 to 12,000 Republicans will travel to a state convention in Richmond to choose between Attorney General Mark Earley and Lieutenant Governor John Hager.
Early is thought to have the lead and the support of most Christian conservatives, but Hager has tried to move to the right of Early, and it will likely come down to who gets their troops out.
Wealthy businessman Mark Warner, unopposed for the Democratic nomination, has been waging a television campaign since May 4. 
In New Jersey, there is another divisive Republican gubernatorial battle between neo-conservative darling, Jersey City Mayor Bret Schundler, and a more moderate Republican, former Congressman Bob Franks.
Franks jumped into the race when acting Governor Donald DiFrancesco (who had taken over for Christie Todd Whitman when she resigned to head the EPA) suddenly dropped out. 
Mainstream Republicans were aghast that Schundler, who has been attacking the Republican "clique" that runs Trenton, might have a clear shot at the nomination, so they drafted Franks into the race. 
The winner of the June 26 primary will face Democratic candidate Rep. Jim.
McGreevy, who has had $5.9 million to spend on the uncontested primary and will have the "full backing" of the DNC (read $800,000) in the fall. 
There are also three special elections for the House due to the deaths of Democratic members Julian Dixon, D-Calif., Norman Sisisky, D-Va., and Joe Moakley, D-Mass.
The Dixon and Moakley seats are safe for the Democrats, but the Sisisky seat is very competitive.
Vice President Dick Cheney will go to the district on Monday to campaign for Republican State Senator Randy Forbes, who is running against Democratic State Senator Louise Lucas. 
The Democratic primary for Moakley's seat will get significant national attention because of the probable candidacy of yet another Kennedy, RFK's son Max. 
He will not have an easy time however.
Several entrenched locals in the parochial district are possible strong contenders, including state senators Brian Joyce, Steve Lynch and Marc Pacheo. 
There will also be special elections in Florida's 1st District and Arkansas' 3rd to fill vacancies caused by the resignations of popular Republican congressmen Joe Scarborough and Asa Hutchinson. 
Moakley's pal, former speaker Tip O'Neill was fond of saying, "All politics are local.
" If that's the case, the "off-year" may be the most intensely political of them all.
Western military intervention in Macedonia remains off the agenda despite a request from President Boris Trajkovski for help to disarm ethnic Albanian guerrillas, NATO chief George Robertson said Thursday. 
However, he said the alliance expressed support for the internationally backed peace plan unveiled by Trajkovski last week, which covers incentives for the rebels to give up their four-month insurgency and contains proposals for disarmament. 
"The key thing now is to translate a plan on paper into peace in place," Robertson said after arriving in Skopje following a NATO meeting in Brussels, Belgium. 
Robertson said there are no plans for NATO-led Kosovo peacekeepers to be deployed in Macedonia. 
"We haven't started thinking about alterations to mandates," he said. 
Meanwhile, Britain, already a major contributor to peacekeeping in the Balkans, said on Thursday it had offered to send training teams to help the Macedonian army, which is facing an insurgency by ethnic Albanian rebels. 
The Ministry of Defense said the offer of assistance had been open for some time but that the Macedonians had yet to make a direct request for help. 
"We have offered the Macedonian government training teams to help out their army," a Defense Ministry spokesman said. 
"We are talking about what may be required in the future.
The secretary general (of NATO) is over there at the moment, and he will decide what, if anything, needs to be done." 
"What we are here to do is to encourage this process, the process of dialogue (and) reforms," said Robertson, who was accompanied by European Union security chief Javier Solana. 
Trajkovski's spokeswoman Dimka Ilkova-Boskovic said that during talks Thursday, Solana said the European Union was ready to provide forces to help implement the disarming of rebels under any peace deal. 
The United States and the European Union Thursday, however, stressed the need for political, not military, solutions for Macedonia. 
A joint statement to be issued by President Bush and EU leaders said: "Together, we are endeavoring to prevent extremism from undermining the democratic process and stress the need for political, not military, solutions." 
NATO, though, played down speculation Wednesday that it was considering military intervention, but diplomats say it could play a role in the disarmament process, as it has in neighboring Kosovo. 
"President Trajkovski has asked us officially if we will help with that process," Robertson told a news conference after talks with Macedonian political leaders.
"I will be taking that request back to NATO headquarters to see what we can do." 
Violence erupted in Macedonia in February when ethnic Albanian militants took up arms in a fight they say is for broader rights.
Macedonian authorities have led several offensives to dislodge the rebels from their strongholds, contending they are separatists bent on carving up the country. 
While refusing to negotiate with the rebels, Trajkovski and other top officials representing the majority Slavic population are trying to reach an agreement with political leaders of the restive ethnic Albanian community, which accounts for nearly one-third of Macedonia's 2 million people. 
The rebels, who call themselves the National Liberation Army, issued a statement Thursday demanding that their representatives be included in the peace negotiations and that NATO be a guarantor of a cease-fire and an eventual political agreement. 
They said a general cease-fire should be proclaimed and NLA members should later be integrated into the army and police, according to the ethnic composition of the country.
They also demanded general amnesty and the release of ethnic Albanian political prisoners. 
A government spokesman, speaking on condition of anonymity, rejected the rebel demands, especially their direct inclusion in the talks and integration into the army and police.
French Transport Minister Jean-Claude Gayssot said Friday that technical tests on the supersonic Concorde are running smoothly and the grounded aircraft would likely return to the skies this autumn. 
Experts have been testing modifications to the delta-winged jet that are designed to prevent crashes like the July 25 accident that killed 113 people, including four on the ground.
The 12 remaining Air France and British Airways Concordes have been grounded for passenger flights since the crash. 
"During the autumn, after it is guaranteed that that the chain of events that led to the catastrophe cannot repeat itself, the (plane's) airworthiness certificate will be restored," Gayssot told Europe-1 radio. 
The French transport minister said he wanted both British and French authorities to OK the jet at the same time. 
"Technical tests are continuing, notably in Britain, and things are going well," Gayssot said. 
Gayssot praised the effectiveness of a new, extra-durable tire made by the French company Michelin, which aims to prevent ruptures like the one believed to have set in motion the chain of events leading to the crash. 
Engineers are also designing a fuel tank liner to prevent punctures. 
Authorities believe the crash was caused when a stray metal strip on the runway gashed one of the Concorde's tires, sending rubber debris hurtling toward fuel tanks in the wings and triggering a fuel leak and raging fire that brought the plane down.
Military prosecutors have begun a criminal investigation into allegations that the Kursk collided with an unidentified vessel that later escaped, the Interfax news agency reported Saturday.
Citing unidentified sources, Interfax said the prosecutors believe the vessel violated safety rules and was directly responsible for the sinking of the Kursk. 
A spokesman at the military prosecutor's office could not confirm the report Saturday.
An investigation by the prosecutor-general's office had been announced previously. 
Russian experts have not conclusively determined what was responsible for two explosions aboard the Kursk, which went down Aug. 12 during military exercises in the Barents.
Military officials claim the most likely scenario was that the Kursk collided with another vessel, most likely a foreign submarine. 
Both Britain and the United States denied their submarines collided with the Kursk. 
Interfax said the alleged vessel was being investigated for "violation of safety rules in the movement and use of rail, air or water transport, which resulted in the death of two or more people because of carelessness." 
Some observers say the most likely reason for the sinking was an internal malfunction and explosion in the submarine's torpedo compartment.
Russian officials also have not ruled out the possibility that the Kursk hit a World War II-era mine. 
The cause of the disaster probably won't be known until experts study the shattered submarine more closely to see if it can be raised.
Russia is negotiating with Norwegian and Dutch companies to bring up the wreckage. 
Russian officials have sought to quash concern around the world over the Kursk's two nuclear reactors.
Officials say there is no sign of unusual radiation levels around the submarine, but there is growing concern that the reactors are not safe and may begin leaking. 
Many Russians accused the government of being slow to react to the sinking and of bungling rescue efforts. 
The disaster has been a grueling ordeal for the families, many of whom learned of the sinking from television reports , then endured days of a confused rescue operation, then only heard from Norwegian divers that all aboard were dead. 
Even Russia's handling of the bereaved relatives has drawn criticism. 
As CBS News Correspondent Richard Roth reports, when one woman wanted answers from a beleaguered bureaucrat, what she got was a tranquilizer a hypodermic pumped into her by a Navy medic. 
While a Russian psychologist says tranquilizer administration is an accepted Russian practice in such circumstances, to some the image illustrated the callous treatment families were receiving at the time. 
Some observers have said the allegation that a foreign vessel was responsible for the disaster is an attempt to deflect blame away from faults within Russia's poorly maintained and cash-strapped armed forces. 
During several days of attempts by Russian mini-submarines to dock with the sunken Kursk's aft escape hatch, officials said the hatch was severely damaged.
But a Norwegian-British team of divers that eventually succeeded in opening the hatch said it was in good shape. 
"There was evidence of what looked liked cracking, but it turned out to be signs of regular movement of the rubber panels ... and that could be construed as damage," one of the divers, Tony Scott, told The Associated Press on Saturday. 
There are even reports that Russian officials stymied foreign rescue efforts when the sub first went down. 
"At times there were so many wrong details and disinformation from Russia that it was close to endangering the divers," said Norwegian Rear Admiral Einar Skorgen, who commands the armed forces in north Norway.
"We couldn't rely on the information we were getting."
Michael Skupin has learned the truest sense of the word "survivor".
Along with his wife Peni, his 3-year old child Emily and four other travelers, Skupin, who had just recovered from severe burns he received on "Survivor: The Australian Outback," walked away from a plane crash on the shores of Lake Michigan on Sept. 24. 
Alive and well, he talks with The Early Show about his experience.
The Skupins were returning from a weekend Michigan Republican conference on board a twin-engine Seneca.
The pilot, Randolf Rice, radioed that the plane was low on fuel and he was planning on touching down at nearby Pellston airport.
A short time later, Rice radioed again, saying that he had lost an engine. 
Skupin said they were at 6,000 feet when he learned of the engine problems.
"I just prayed," he said.
"I didn't know what else to do, so I prayed with my family." 
Skupin had been taking flying lessons from the pilot, but said he was not at the controls during this flight.
"I can only fly a single engine, this is a dual engine turbo-prop," Skupin said.
The pilot, his wife and two children were the other people on board. 
"He (Rice) was looking for a place to put it down, " Skupin said.
"There was a crowded roadway, a rocky shoreline or the water." 
The plane crashed into the beach and flipped over.
Skupin couldn't believe everyone made it out safely.
"I looked at the space that was the cockpit and couldn't believe we were in there.
The rescue people couldn't believe it either." 
Peni Skupin is five months pregnant and went into labor after the crash.
According to Skupin, the contractions stopped soon after she arrived at the hospital and she is doing well now. 
China still wants compensation from the United States over the collision of a U.S. spy plane and a Chinese jet fighter, the Foreign Ministry said Thursday. 
China asked for $1 million for plane-related expenses and lodging for the crew of the U.S. Navy EP-3E. The 24 crew members, all from the Whidbey Island Naval Air Station near Oak Harbor, Wash., were held for 11 days after the plane made an emergency landing on April 1 on China's Hainan island following the collision in international airspace over the South China Sea. 
China rejected a U.S. offer of $34,000 that American officials said they viewed as fair and reasonable. 
"The United States offer was totally unacceptable," ministry spokesman Sun Yuxi said in response to a reporter's question about whether China has dropped its compensation demand. 
"The issue remains at that point," Sun said at a regularly scheduled news conference. 
The Chinese fighter plane was lost and the pilot presumed dead.
The incident sorely tested China-U.S. relations, with each side blaming the other for the collision and China accusing the U.S. plane of landing on its territory in violation of international law. 
At China's insistence, the EP-3 was disassembled and returned to the United States in pieces.
Putin, hours before leaving for the United States, said Monday the Russian military had to take the current global situation into account when drawing up policy priorities. 
"An analysis of the rapidly changing situation shows that we correctly defined the nature of the new threats to national security," Putin said in comments broadcast on television. "
Terrorism threatens the entire system of strategic stability.
We should know that the aim of the terrorists is to obtain weapons of mass destruction.
Bioterrorism has already become a fact." 
Russia also had carefully phrased warnings for the U.S. over the weekend, warning Sunday of "dangerous trends toward disrupting" a global treaty banning nuclear tests.
In strong statements to a U.N. conference boycotted by the Americans, Russian officials dismissed U.S. concerns that the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty would undermine the safety of U.S. and Russian nuclear arsenals. 
Putin said Moscow has always considered the treaty a "most important instrument" in limiting nuclear weapons and preserving strategic stability. 
In another statement, senior Russian official Igor Sergeyev said: "There are dangerous trends towards disrupting (the treaty).
This may result in a crisis of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty regime and an uncontained spread of the nuclear weapons." 
He did not mention the United States directly.
In the first federal lawsuit of its kind, a pharmacist from Seattle has sued her employer Bartell Drug Co., because it doesn't cover contraceptives in its health plan.
The 26-year-old calls it sexual discrimination. 
Jennifer Erickson said she became frustrated when she had to tell customers constantly that the money to cover their birth control pills would have to come out of their own pockets.
Meanwhile she said, many companies cover abortions and vasectomies. 
"There are 60 million women of childbearing age in this country and I am standing up for them too," Erickson said.
"For most women of my age, that's the only medication they get." 
She intends to seek class-action status for the suit filed Wednesday. 
But the drugstore chain's chief financial officer, Jean Bartell Barber, contends the plan does a good job covering most costs for employees. 
"We strongly believe that our program is lawful and nondiscriminatory," Barber said. 
The company's plan does not cover contraceptives unless prescribed for medical conditions that aren't related to birth control Viagra, infertility and drugs for weight loss or immunization agents. 
Advocates hope other women will follow Erickson's lead and try to force companies to cover contraceptives in their insurance policies. 
"We believe there are more women waiting in the wings," said Judy Appelbaum, vice president of the National Women's Law Center. 
Last year, 60 groups asked the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission to instruct employers that excluding contraceptives from their health plans amounts to sex discrimination. 
In 1998, Congress required that health plans for federal employees cover prescription contraceptives. 
The debate became particularly charged after the introduction of Viagra, the male impotence pill, which some insurers cover. 
Roberta Riley, Erickson's lead attorney, said only 13 states require certain health plans to include contraceptives and Washington isn't one of them. 
"A woman's right to be free from sex discrimination should not depend on what state she lives in," she said. 
Chris Charbonneau, president and CEO of Planned Parenthood of Western Washington, said policies that don't include contraceptives force women to pay 68 percent more out-of-pocket than men for health care. 
"The public overwhelmingly supports birth-control coverage because they understand that it prevents unintended pregnancy and reduces the need for abortions," Charbonneau said. 
Bartell, founded in 1890, has 48 stores in the Seattle area and is the oldest family-owned drugstore chain in the nation.
Canada became the first country in the world Monday to allow terminally ill patients to grow and smoke their own marijuana, overriding protests from doctors who said the decision could put them in an awkward situation. 
Until now, anyone in Canada wanting to smoke pot to alleviate their pain has had to apply to Health Minister Allan Rock for special permission.
Some 300 have already done so. 
But from Monday, anyone with a terminal illness who is expected to live less than a year will be allowed access to marijuana on the production of a doctor's certificate. 
Others who will be able to benefit include those suffering serious pain from conditions such as multiple sclerosis, cancer, AIDS and epilepsy as well as severe forms of arthritis and spinal cord problems. 
"This compassionate measure will improve the quality of life of sick Canadians, particularly those who are terminally ill," Rock said in a statement. 
The Canadian move contrasts sharply with the situation in the United States, where the Supreme Court ruled in May that cannabis clubs could not legally distribute marijuana as a "medical necessity" for seriously ill patients. 
The U.S. Justice Department questions marijuana's medical usefulness and maintains it must remain banned. 
Marijuana is also prohibited in Canada and sufferers will need a permit to grow their own supply.
Alternatively, they can designate someone else to do it for them or -- at some stage in the future -- buy it from the government. 
Last December, Ottawa awarded a $3.7 million contract to a company to grow federally approved marijuana in a former mine near the Manitoban town of Flin-Flon.
The first pot for sale should be ready early next year. 
Those patients granted permission to smoke marijuana for medical purposes will be allowed to possess a 30-day supply at any given time. 
Canada's doctors have shown little enthusiasm for the idea, saying it will force them to decide whether patients should be allowed access to a substance that has no proven medicinal value. 
"We are still disappointed the fundamental medical issues of quality, efficacy and patient safety have been ignored," the Canadian Medical Association (CMA) said in a statement. 
"These regulations are placing Canadian physicians and their patients in the precarious position of attempting to access a product that has not gone through the normal protocols of rigorous pre-market testing." 
The CMA said it feared patients might now conclude they could ask for marijuana to combat the symptoms of any condition and might even pressure their doctors to be given marijuana for recreational purposes. 
Although Rock dismisses the idea that the new regulations will lead to the decriminalization of marijuana, there are signs the government's position is under some pressure. 
Justice Minister Anne McLellan says she is open to debate on the issue while former Canadian prime minister Joe Clark, who leads the minority Conservative party, said in May he supported moves toward decriminalization of the drug.
Terry McAuliffe, the 43-year-old maestro of soft money, has been selected as the new chairman of the Democratic National Committee. 
"With the Republicans holding the White House, the Congress and the courts, the American people are counting on us to get out of our seats and to fight for them!
That's why our cause is so urgent and our time is so precious," he said in an acceptance speech. 
McAuliffe's only opponent Maynard Jackson, the former mayor of Atlanta, withdrew from the race at the last moment, clearing the way for McAuliffe.
Jackson got into the contest at the urging of Maxine Waters and other members of the Congressional Black Caucus and picked up support from a disparate group of reformers and disgruntled Democrats.
Jackson was also backed by the Teamsters Union and campaign finance reformers Bill Bradley and Russ Feingold. 
Bradley and Feingold s opposition to McAulliffe was couched in the argument that it is a terrible symbol for the Democrats to pick as their leader someone whose only political accomplishment has been raising money.
In May of 2000, McAuliffe was so successful in raising $26.5 million for the Democrats that Al Gore called him the "greatest fundraiser in the universe." 
But, beyond being a fundraiser McAuliffe is a quintessential politician.
He is the king of schmooze who works non-stop and who has patted every prominent back in the Democratic Party for the last 20 years.
The Clintons are his most recent friends but he's a prot?g? of former Rep. Tony Coelho and House Democratic Leader Dick Gephardt was in his wedding.
When word got out that Al Gore was miffed that McAuliffe had been designated the heir apparent without his input, McAuliffe stroked Gore and he says they have been talking on the phone ever since.
McAuliffe told the New York Times that Gore is the frontrunner for 2004 though he also gave a wink and a nod to John Kerrey and John Edwards. 
There is a certain irony that the Democrats, who claim to support campaign finance reform and who were stung with scandals from the 1996 fund-raising which McAuliffe engineered, would turn to the king of soft money as their chair.
If McCain-Feingold (which McAuliffe says he supports) were to pass, what would McAuliffe do? 
"Get into the hard money business," says Democracy 21 s Fred Werhteimer.
No problem says the McAuliffe staff.
He "packed the boxes at the MCI Center" in May with hard money (the $50 seats in the peanut gallery as opposed to $500,000 tables on the floor).
They add that he is a big believer in direct mail and wants to sponsor training programs for state parties in fundraising. 
"There was life before soft money," Wertheimer says, and McAuliffe believes he can find a way. 
But it may not be so easy. 
During the Clinton administration the Democrats became quite competitive with the GOP on soft money ($244 million for the Republicans and $243 million for the Democrats in 2000), but trailed far behind in hard money contributions ($447 million for the GOP; $270 million for the Democrats). 
The limit on hard money is $20,000 per individual, and the Republicans have a big head start in building lists of people who can write those checks.
And now they have the White House as bait - even if the Lincoln Bedroom is no longer an option. 
MMI Viacom Internet Services Inc.
All Rights Reserved. 
The recording industry, sensing victory and looking to avoid trial in its lawsuit against Napster, asked a federal judge to rule that the song-swap company is liable for damages for copyright infringement. 
In a request for summary judgment filed late Tuesday with U.S. District Judge Marilyn Hall Patel, the recording industry insisted Napster had direct knowledge of the copyright infringement aided by its network of users.
The documents were made available Wednesday. 
"Napster's Web site advertised the piratical nature of the system by bragging that, 'With Napster, you'll never come up empty handed when searching for your favorite music again,'" attorneys for the recording industry wrote in their brief. 
The recording industry also said Napster benefitted financially from the free trade of copyright music, because the company based its value on the quantity and quality of songs available through its network. 
Napster attorneys were not immediately available for comment. 
Record industry attorneys asked for an Oct. 1 hearing with Patel on the summary judgment request. 
Patel ruled last year that Napster's free swapping of copyright songs is illegal and issued an injunction forcing the company to closely police its system for pirated music if it wanted to stay in business. 
Napster's song-trading network has been offline since July 2, when it took down the system to comply with that order and improve filters that weed out copyright music. 
Patel later told the company to remain offline until it could offer a foolproof service able to screen out every single unauthorized song. 
Napster appealed the judge's order and an appellate court allowed Napster to resume its service, but the company has yet to come back online. 
Since Napster took its service down, online music fans have turned to other services such as Kazaa and Gnutella for free music downloads.
Some of Kazaa's servers are located outside of the U.S. and Gnutella is a decentralized network of computer users - factors that make those services hard to corral. 
Napster has been looking for a way out of the lawsuit for months, maintaining a standing offer to settle and promising to develop a legal subscription service to offer copyright music later this year. 
In February, Napster offered $1 billion to the recording industry to settle, but the offer was rejected. 
The record companies are seeking the maximum statutory damages of $100,000 for each work infringed and believe the total amount of damages will exceed $100 million.
No trial date has been set. 
New Yorkers have been treated to a public spectacle unusual even for the media-rich Big Apple: a bitter war of words between Mayor Rudy Giuliani and his estranged wife. 
The conflict between Giuliani and wife Donna Hanover reached a low point of sorts on Sunday when the New York Daily News reported that the cancer treatment Giuliani has been undergoing has left him impotent.
Republican Giuliani dropped out a Senate race against Hillary Clinton after he was diagnosed with prostate cancer last June. 
According to the Daily News, it was the mayor's friends who divulged a fact that would normally be kept strictly private - apparently in an effort to cast him in a more sympathetic light.
The Giuilani pals told the newspaper that despite the mayor's medical condition, Hanover has refused his request for a bigger room at Gracie Mansion, the official mayoral residence where Giuliani and Hanover live separately.
The couple has two children, 11 and 15. 
That friends of the mayor were willing to adopt such a desperate tactic is an indication of how badly Giuliani has fared in the public relations war with his wife.
The mayor's weak showing can be traced to his affair with Judi Nathan, a 46-year-old Manhattan woman who sometimes accompanies Giuliani to events around the city. 
Publicity about the affair has damaged the mayor politically.
The city's high-circulation tabloid newspapers have given prominent play to the mayor's marriage woes.
Many political observers say the marital messiness was at least as important as Giuliani's cancer condition in prompting the mayor to drop out of a run against Hillary Clinton. 
Giuliani, 56, formally filed for divorce from Hanover, 51, last October.
Most of the details were kept quiet until last week. 
That's when Hanover sought a restraining order to bar Nathan from Gracie Mansion. 
While documents related to the case are sealed - as they are in all divorce cases in New York state - divorce attorneys say such requests are usually made out of fear that the visits would emotionally harm children living in the house. 
But Giuliani's divorce lawyer Raoul Felder disputes that Hanover has the children in mind.
In court last week, he called the city's first lady a "foolish" and "trivial" woman bent on destroying Giuliani and garnering publicity. 
"She will stay in Gracie Mansion until they take her screaming, scratching, and kicking out of that place," he said. 
Hanover's attorney, Helene Brezinsky, responded by calling Giuliani "a man who has been flaunting his mistress.
Look at that if you want to know who wants publicity." 
Besides serving as the family's living quarters, the taxpayer-supported residence is also used for official events - and Nathan, a nurse who now works for a philanthropic organization, has been known to attend some of them.
Her visits include a 1999 celebration honoring the world champion Yankees, and a party in March that included the Rockettes and the cast of "The Sopranos." 
Gracie Mansion, built in 1799 as a country house for a Scottish merchant, is the site of dozens of public ceremonies and press conferences each year.
The two-story, federal-style building consists of the Old House, where the family lives, and the reception area, where most public events are held.
Each Wednesday and Thursday morning, the house is open for public tours. 
Acting State Supreme Court Justice Judith Gische has not yet ruled on Hanover's request, which both Giuliani and Hanover have declined to discuss publicly. 
Divorce attorney Susan Bracker said there are two common conditions under which Nathan could be barred from Gracie Mansion: if the mayor has an alternate residence, or if there were the risk of domestic violence. 
But other lawyers say Hanover must simply show that the children's well-being would be harmed by Nathan's visits.
Conversely, if Giuliani can show that Nathan's presence at Gracie is vital to his job as mayor, Hanover would have a harder time keeping Nathan out. 
"For all we know, she aids him in his work," Beslow said. 
MMI Viacom Internet Services Inc.
All Rights Reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
The Associated Press contributed to this report. 
Dennis Tito's trip into space was a unique vacation, but in reflecting on it Tuesday he sounded some notes common to mundane voyagers, saying the trip ended all too soon and that he wants to be seen as a traveler and not a mere tourist. 
"I would like people to see me as a serious man who had a dream and pursued in the face of great difficulty," he told a news conference at Star City, the cosmonaut training facility outside Moscow. 
"Unfortunately, life is short and I believe that one should do everything possible to achieve their dreams and hopefully this will be an inspiration to others to do the same," he said of the eight-day trip, including six days aboard the international space station. 
To encourage others, he rhapsodized about the experience, but still found himself at a loss for words two days after the voyage ended. 
After the flight to the space station, during which he suffered from space sickness, "once we reached the ISS ... it became for me a euphoric experience that lasted the entire six days, and if it were available to me I would have stayed up there for months," Tito said. 
"I spent 60 years on Earth and eight days in space and from my viewpoint it was two separate lives.
It would take a long time to explain," the 60-year-old American tycoon said. 
The most profound moment for him was when he spoke to his children on Earth over what he called a ham radio link, Tito said, choking up.
He did not give further details. 
He was more verbal on the topic of the fierce objections to the trip raised by the U.S. space agency NASA. 
Tito said NASA had always envisioned the space station as having a commercial potential for travelers and suggested the agency raised complaints because "we came along and pushed up the timetable maybe half a dozen years." 
"Change is sometimes difficult," he admonished.
"I don't feel bad about it at all." 
NASA chief Daniel Goldin last week drew a contrast between Tito, who negotiated his trip with Russian officials, and aspiring space tourist James Cameron, calling the film director "an American patriot" for dealing with the U.S. agency. 
"I don't think he's in a position to determine who is an American patriot and who isn't," Tito said sharply. 
NASA had complained that sending an amateur could interfere with the space station's work and Goldin later said Tito's trip was putting significant stress on NASA. 
But Russian officials argued that Tito had trained for months and rejected implications that his trip was turning the space station into an orbiting dude ranch.
Talgat Musabayev, one of two cosmonauts who traveled with Tito, spoke highly of his performance. 
"Any flight on a spacecraft, it's not a flight on a Boeing 747 airliner.
It's a completely different kind of flight...
completely different demands on one's health," he told the news conference. "
Dennis Tito was a full member of the crew, even though it appeared as if he were a tourist." 
Tito reportedly paid up to $20 million for the trip.
He said Tuesday that the bill has been paid in full, but said he could not state the cost because the contract's terms were confidential. 
Whatever the cost, "money is relative and for me it was a life dream.
It was a dream that began when I didn't have any money," he said. 
Nonetheless, his next jaunt is going to be more modest. 
"My next holiday will be chartering a small sailboat which I'll skipper myself, maybe with one other person.
A very inexpensive vacation, maybe a few thousand dollars." 
In the interim, he plans to speak out in favor of more opportunities for space visitors. 
"I think this will all turn out to be very positive, not only for NASA but for the relationship of Russia and the United States," he said. 
Tito, Musabayev and cosmonaut Yuri Baturin have been given an initial clean bill of health by doctors.
Tito is scheduled to return to the United States on Saturday. 
By Jim Heintz
Britain's marijuana laws should be relaxed to give police more time to battle harder drugs, the nation's top law enforcement official said Tuesday. 
Home Secretary David Blunkett said reclassifying marijuana, or cannabis, as a "Class C drug" putting it in the same category as anabolic steroids would not be the same as decriminalization or legalization.
However, such a change means that those possessing marijuana would not be subject to arrest. 
"Cannabis would remain a controlled drug and using it a criminal offense ... but it would make clearer the distinction between cannabis and Class A drugs like heroin and cocaine," Blunkett told a House of Commons committee meeting. 
"It is time for an honest and common sense approach focusing effectively on drugs that cause most harm," he added. 
Blunkett's statement comes amid an intensifying political debate about marijuana.
Senior figures from all three major political parties have now urged a review of cannabis laws. 
Metropolitan Police Commissioner Sir John Stevens called the proposal a reflection of changing police and public attitudes. 
"This is a clear signal that (marijuana possession) is not such a high priority as it was perceived to be," Stevens said.
"There are lots of other more high profile issues for police officers to tackle." 
A leading researcher in the potential use of marijuana for medical treatment praised the proposal. 
Dr. John Zajicek, who is doing clinical trials with cannabis to treat multiple sclerosis, said a loosening of the law could aid MS sufferers. 
"If we are to provide the evidence that the drug is useful in alleviating pain in MS then there has to be a way of getting the drug to those patients," he said. 
Police say seven out of 10 drug arrests are for marijuana and that processing a marijuana-related arrest creates several hours of police paperwork and usually ends with a small fine. 
Changing the marijuana laws would require approval by Parliament.
The proposal will first be discussed with senior police officers and the Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs, a Home Office spokesman said.
A final decision is expected in the spring. 
Marijuana is currently a Class B drug, and possession carries a maximum penalty of five years in jail. 
Simple possession of a Class C drug carries a maximum sentence of two years, and British law states that only offenses punishable with at least five years imprisonment are subject to arrest.
In lesser offenses, a police officer can only issue a warning or a court summons. 
Possession with intent to supply or supplying Class C drugs would still be an arrestable offense. 
One south London borough is effectively implementing the home secretary's proposal.
Since July, Lambeth police have been giving only a verbal warning to anyone caught with a small amount of marijuana.
President Bush said "it may take a year or two" to track down Osama bin Laden and his terrorist al Qaida network in Afghanistan, but asserted that after a five-day aerial bombardment, "We've got them on the run." 
In a prime-time news conference held Thursday at the White House, Mr. Bush said he did not know whether bin Laden was dead or alive.
"I want him brought to justice," he said of the shadowy figure believed behind the terrorist attacks in New York and Washington that killed 5,000 people one month ago. 
The president said that an FBI warning issued earlier in the day was the result of a "general threat" of possible future terrorist acts the government had received.
"I hope it's the last, but given the attitude of the evildoers it may not be," he added. 
At the same time, he sought to reassure Americans the government was doing all it could to make them safe.
"If we receive specific intelligence that targets a specific building or city or facility
I can assure you our government will do everything possible to protect the citizens," he said. 
Mr. Bush urged Americans not to live in fear, because that's what the terrorists want. 
After five days of sustained U.S. bombing, the president insisted that Afghanistan is no longer a safe haven for bin Laden. 
Despite the aerial pounding, Bush held out a carrot to the Taliban rulers of Afghanistan.
"You still have a second chance.
Just bring him in and bring his leaders and lieutenants and other thugs and criminals with him." 
And yet the president looked ahead to a day when the Taliban would be pushed from power.
He suggested the United Nations could help form a new government for Afghanistan after the U.S.-led military mission is completed. 
Asked whether he envisioned expanding military action beyond Afghanistan to Iraq or Syria, Bush said that the United States would "bring to justice" nations that harbor terrorists.
In particular, he called Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein an "evil man" and added, "we're watching him very carefully." 
While the current focus is on Afghanistan, he said "we're looking for al Qaida cells around the world" and if the United States find any, it will pursue them. 
Bush spoke at the first prime-time news conference of his presidency, but more importantly, one month to the day after terrorist attacks in New York and Washington murdered thousands, damaged the nation's economy and shattered its complacency. 
In the month since, the president has labored to construct a foundation for an international war on terrorism, moving to choke off the funding essential for terrorists to carry out their strikes, lining up support from other nations, creating a new Office of Homeland Security and beginning last Sunday unleashing the nation's military. 
The news conference capped a national day of remembrance.
There were memorial services around the nation to remember the more than 5,000 people killed when suicide hijackers seized four commercial airliners and crashed them into the World Trade Center in New York, the Pentagon and the Pennsylvania countryside. 
At the news conference, Bush also said that Syria, a nation often linked with terrorist groups, had expressed a desire to help with the anti-terror coalition.
"We'll give them an opportunity to do so."
He did not give specifics on the type of assistance Syria offered, but said he takes it seriously. 
"If you want to join the coalition against terror, we will welcome you," Bush said. 
Asked whether he was calling for sacrifice from Americans as part of the war against terrorism, Bush said, "I think there's a certain sacrifice when you lose a piece of your soul."
He said he had seen tears in the eyes of some of the people attending a ceremony of remembrance earlier in the day at the Pentagon. 
President Bush also gave his strongest support to date for the creation of a Palestinian state if it left Israel in peace. 
Bush said at the news conference his backing depended on the start of a peace process based on a plan outlined by former Sen. George Mitchell that calls for a cease-fire and confidence-building measures leading up to peace talks. 
Bush said that he hoped Palestinian President Yasser Arafat was making an effort to reduce violence in the Middle East that has killed at least 624 Palestinians and 125 Israelis in the last year and declined to say if he would meet the Palestinian leader. 
"If I am convinced that a meeting with a particular party at this point in time will further the process, I will do so.
If it turns out to be an empty photo opportunity that creates expectations that will become dashed, I won't meet," he said. 
"I hope progress is being made.
I was pleased to see that Mr. Arafat is trying to control the radical elements within the Palestinian Authority.
I think the world ought to applaud him for that," the president said. 
Bush said that despite Russia's cooperation in the war on terrorism, he had not changed his mind about abandoning the Cold War-era Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty and proceeding with a U.S. missile defense system.
He said the 1972 ABM treaty "is outdated, antiquated and useless," and said it makes sense to permit development of an alternative system that could thwart terrorist attempts to launch missile strikes. 
"I am more than anxious to continue making my case" to Russian President Vladimir Putin, he said.
President Bush found a message in the two corporate logos: "America is united!"
he said.
"We are united in bringing justice to those folks who did the evil deed on Sept. 11."
As he spoke, departing jets roared overhead. 
Terrorists hijacked four airplanes Sept. 11, crashing two into the World Trade Center in New York and one into the Pentagon outside Washington.
A fourth crashed in Pennsylvania, apparently after passengers struggled with the hijackers.
U.S. air travel has dropped sharply since the attacks. 
"We will not surrender our freedom to travel.
We will not surrender our freedoms in America," Mr. Bush said, his voice rising to a shout.
"You may think you have struck our soul.
You haven't touched it!" 
Expanding the use of federal air marshals aboard commercial airliners. 
Spending $500 million on plane modifications, including efforts to restrict the opening of cockpit doors during flights, fortify cockpit doors to deny access from the cabin, alert the cockpit crew to activity in the cabin, and ensure continuous operation of the aircraft transponder in the event of an emergency.
The transponder allows air traffic controllers to track a plane. 
Putting the federal government in charge of airport security and screening, including the purchase and maintenance of all equipment.
The government would supervise passenger and baggage security and perform background checks on security personnel.
Uniformed federal workers would manage all operations; federal and nonfederal workers would share the security work.
Many airport security workers would remain in the employ of private companies, but with increased oversight by the federal government. 
State governors asked to call up National Guard troops as a strong security presence at airports while the new measures are implemented. 
Mr. Bush also said he would invest in technologies that allow pilots to monitor passenger cabins by video camera, and let control towers take over "distressed" aircraft by remote control. 
In response to the president's proposals, most Democrats and a sizable number of Republicans in Congress said the government must do more than supervise baggage screening by civilian employees.
They want federal agents to take over the job, reports CBS News Chief Washington Correspondent Bob Scheiffer . 
Congressman Jim Oberstar, who is one of the most influential house members on aviation policy said, "we don't contract out the duties of the army." 
With $5 billion in emergency aid already going to the airlines, Democrats also want federal help for airline workers who've been laid off. 
What everyone in Washington agrees on is that security can no longer be left to the airlines. 
Some of Mr. Bush's measures can be implemented by the Federal Aviation Authority, while others will have to be approved by Congress, officials said. 
The FAA has ordered new security steps in recent days, including an end to curb-side check-in and a ban on knives and other cutting instruments carried on board. 
The agency also has renewed efforts to confirm the identities of airline, airport and contract workers with access to aircraft and sensitive areas of the airport. 
A key goal of the Bush administration is to restore confidence in commercial air travel, which has been battered in the wake of the attacks, triggering thousands of industry layoffs and contributing to the economic slump. 
"One of my concerns is that this terrible incident has convinced many Americans to stay at home.
One of the keys to economic recovery is going to be the vitality of the airline industry," Mr. Bush told reporters Wednesday. 
Mr. Bush cast doubt on a proposal circulating on Capitol Hill to allow pilots to have weapons in the cockpit.
"There may be better ways to do it than that," he said. 
Transportation Secretary Norman Mineta flew to Chicago Thursday aboard a commercial flight to demonstrate his confidence in the air system.
He was accompanied by Jane Garvey, head of the FAA. 
Mineta waited in a long line at a BWI security checkpoint.
He placed a leather bag on a scanner's conveyor belt, took out his keys and walked through the metal detector.
It beeped, prompting a security guard to give Mineta a thorough sweep with a hand-held detector before allowing him onto Concourse A. Mineta called the system safe, secure and stable. 
White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said the number of commercial flights each day had returned to near normal, now at about 5,500, compared with the maximum before the attacks of 6,500. 
However, relatively few people are on those flights.
Delta Air Lines, for example, says its planes typically are only 35 percent filled.
Trapped inside borders with relief workers gone, supplies dwindling fast and war looming, Afghans who are among the world's toughest survivors, now face potential death in large numbers. 
"It is impossible to overestimate just how bad it is," said Rupert Colville of the U.N. refugee agency.
"It's almost inconceivable, and nobody can get in to film or describe it." 
No matter what happens, aid officials added, events in Afghanistan could fast deteriorate into one of the worst humanitarian crises ever. 
Already, Colville and others say, the scale threatens to approach the Rwandan catastrophe or the worst days of Bosnia.
Winter is weeks away, and border crossings are closed.
Relief efforts are all but paralyzed. 
In the most remote areas, aid workers report, conditions approach famine and are deteriorating by the day.
Hundreds of thousands of Afghans are believed massed along the borders, trying to escape.
Afghanistan's neighbors have refused to let them cross. 
"Millions are in extraordinarily bad shape," Colville said by telephone from the Pakistani city of Quetta.
"They are not Taliban, not fighters, not friends of Osama bin Laden.
Just ordinary Afghans." 
Many people are caught in destitute hamlets up to a week's donkey ride from the nearest lean-to shop.
"I've seen Afghans who didn't know what a doctor was, let alone had ever seen one," Colville said. 
If airstrikes or military incursions start, already weakened civilians will have to make their way to distant relief centers.
Many are too old or sick to move and those who stay with them may die. 
Aid workers note that in the Balkans and Rwanda, calamity came quickly and many people managed to escape to refugee camps from almost normal daily lives.
In Afghanistan, it is different. 
"These people have been crippled by 23 years of conflict, a decade of neglect by the international community and four years of devastating drought," Colville said. 
Mike Sackett, coordinator of U.N. operations in Afghanistan, reached in Islamabad before flying to Iran to press for more help, made a similarly grim assessment. 
"It was already a terrible crisis and now it is worse," he said. 
Huge numbers of exhausted refugees are on the road.
Some have fled cities for rural areas.
Others are trying to leave the country.
Large numbers are weak and vulnerable from years of hardship. 
"These aren't well-fed Bosnians with 20 or 30 pounds of spare body weight," said Peter Kessler, U.N. refugee agency spokesman in Islamabad.
He 7 million of the estimated 21 million people in Afghanistan need aid. 
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan said Thursday the United Nations will need more than a half-billion dollars for air drops and other aid for the refugees if the United States attacks, and he appealed to donor countries to help raise the money. 
The United Nations Children Fund (UNICEF) announced it would send 200 tons of aid to opposition-controlled northern Afghanistan in a huge convoy, leaving the northwestern Pakistani city of Peshawar Saturday. 
Fear of war forced all expatriate U.N. staff and voluntary aid workers to flee Afghanistan, leaving a local staff with dwindling stocks. 
U.N. officials say no one is sure how many Afghans are refugees. 
Officially, about 4 million refugees are outside Afghanistan, with at least 1 million - now perhaps many more - displaced within the country.
About 4.7 million returned after the Soviet invaders departed in 1989, U.N. figures show, but some of those have left again. 
"We already have a crisis, whatever happens, and every day we are losing time - this is critical, critical, critical," said Stephanie Bunker, spokeswoman for the U.N. Humanitarian Coordinator in Afghanistan. 
Afghan society is built around shared hard times, allowing them to live through almost anything in their high mountain reaches and broad deserts. 
"If someone has one cup of tea, he'll give you half," Bunker said.
"It's their way.
Now this is breaking down.
Many have nothing.
The grip on survival itself is slipping.
Quite possibly, people will starve to death." 
Donor support of $330 million for 2001 covers only the most basic needs of the weakest, she said, adding that a well-funded relief program in Afghanistan would run into the billions each year. 
Fresh supplies trickle in from Iran through two northern points that are far from the Taliban stronghold at Kandahar in the south, near where bin Laden has made his base.
If Western allies attack near Kandahar, civilians in the area would have no access to aid. 
The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees appealed Wednesday for $269 million for 1 million people expected to flee across borders in case of hostilities. 
"When food aid can't get in, people will have to move," Colville said.
"No option.
There are millions we don't know about, not to mention the hundreds of thousands leaving cities in the past two weeks." 
Russia's border guard chief Col. Gen. Konstantin Totsky estimates that 120,000 Afghans are massed on Afghanistan's northern border and U.S. air strikes may push them across to poor former Soviet republics that lack the resources to care for them. 
Two years ago, Colville wrote a rueful column in the International Herald Tribune, taking care to note it was his personal opinion and not a U.N. statement. 
He said the Taliban killed 5,000 to 8,000 people over four days in Mazar-e-Sharif, near the Soviet border, but the atrocity went essentially unreported.
While people in Western countries cared about the Balkans, he wrote, Afghanistan was left to its own fate. 
Back in his role as a U.N. spokesman, he is more measured but still clear in warning about an approaching calamity. 
"The world can't just allow Afghanistan to rot," he said.
"What happened at Mazar-e-Sharif was very symptomatic of the outside world's neglect."
Such neglect, he concluded, "is possibly a genocidal act."
Palestinian and Israeli officials said on Saturday that President Yasser Arafat and Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres planned to meet on Sunday in an effort to turn a fragile ceasefire into a lasting truce. 
In a tentative sign the truce may be taking root, members of the militant Hamas group and other Palestinian officials said that Hamas was willing to suspend suicide attacks inside Israel "in the coming period" unless it was provoked by the Jewish state. 
The international community has been pressuring Arafat and Peres to hold the long-overdue meeting as soon as possible in order to strengthen the five-day-old ceasefire. 
A senior Israeli political source said a "very successful" preparatory meeting between Peres, a small Israeli delegation and senior Palestinian negotiators took place on Saturday. 
"If there are no exceptional security incidents, the meeting will take place," the source said. 
It was unclear where Sunday's meeting would be held. 
Arafat visited Saudi Arabia on Saturday to brief Saudi leaders on the latest developments in the Middle East crisis.
He was due to travel to Syria on Tuesday for an official visit that had been postponed after the attacks on New York and Washington. 
Peres and Arafat, both Nobel Prize winners, have met several times during the Palestinian revolt. 
Palestinian Information Minister Yasser Abed Rabbo listed key issues for the success of the meeting: a timetable for the implementation of a pair of U.S.-led truce-to-talks plans under international supervision, the lifting of the Israeli blockade on Palestinian areas, a freeze of the establishment of a buffer zone on a section of the border between the West Bank and Israel proper, and an Israeli withdrawal from Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem. 
Sunday's talks received a boost after a senior Hamas official indicated the group may cease suicide attacks. 
"The Hamas movement and its military wing don't live in a vacuum; they take decisions based on the interests of the Palestinian people," said the official. 
"Is it in the interest of the people to carry out martyrdom attacks now?
Maybe not," he told Reuters. 
Hamas opposes peace talks with Israel and has carried out a wave of suicide attacks inside the Jewish state, killing scores of Israelis. 
Though Arafat has asked for a total cessation of hostilities, Hamas and Palestine Liberation Organisation factions have decided to acquiesce everywhere except in Israeli-controlled areas in the occupied West Bank. 
Meanwhile, the death toll in the year-long Palestinian uprising against Israeli occupation continued to rise. 
Palestinian policemen Imad Awad, from Gaza, died on Saturday from wounds sustained nine days ago during an Israeli incursion into Ramallah, hospital sources said. 
Another man, 60-year-old Abdel-Latif Radwan, suffered a heart attack after inhaling teargas which was fired at a group of Palestinians trying to bypass an army checkpoint near the village of Jet east of the West Bank town of Qalqilya, Palestinian hospital sources said. 
The Israeli army had no immediate comment on the report. 
The deaths brought the toll to at least 586 Palestinians and 168 Israelis since the Palestinians began their uprising against Israeli occupation nearly a year ago after peace talks stalled. 
There were several other clashes in the West Bank and Gaza during the day.
Israeli troops shot and wounded a 33-year-old Palestinian man near the West Bank city of Nablus, hospital sources said. 
Navy divers have recovered an eighth body from a Japanese fishing vessel sunk by a U.S. submarine, meaning only one person's remains are still missing. 
The Thursday recovery exceeds original expectations of Navy divers, who thought they would only find seven bodies in the wreckage. 
The remains were sent to the city medical examiner's office for identification, the Navy said. 
The office earlier identified the seventh body recovered from the Ehime Maru as Jun Nakata, 33, an instructor at Uwajima Fisheries High School. 
Nakata, whose body was found Wednesday, was one of nine men and teen-age boys who died when the USS Greeneville struck the fisheries training vessel on Feb. 9 while demonstrating a rapid-surfacing drill for 16 civilian guests. 
He is the sixth of the eight recovered victims to be identified.
The medical examiner's office said a set of remains recovered last Friday will require further DNA testing. 
The others who have been identified are Hiroshi Nishida, 49, the Ehime Maru's first engineer; Toshimichi Furuya, 47, the chief engineer; Hirotaka Segawa, 60, the chief radio operator; and students Toshiya Sakashima and Katsuya Nomoto, both 17. 
The Ehime Maru sank in 2,000 feet of water nine miles south of Diamond Head, but the 190-foot vessel was relocated to a shallow-water recovery site about one mile south of Honolulu International Airport.
Twenty-six other people aboard the vessel were rescued.
Did Landing Gear Doom Lander? 
A landing gear deployment glitch that may have led to the premature shut down of the Mars Polar Lander's descent engines last December remains one of NASA's top candidates for explaining the loss of the ill-fated spacecraft, agency sources said Wednesday. 
An independent review board is scheduled to release the findings of an exhaustive investigation next week.
It is expected to list, among other possible failure scenarios, a problem in which the normal deployment of the spacecraft's three landing legs high above the red planet's surface could have triggered microswitch sensors intended to detect actual touchdown. 
If the sensors did, in fact, trip when the landing legs deployed, the Polar Lander's flight computer thinking the vehicle had landed would have ordered the descent engines to shut down and the spacecraft would have crashed to the surface. 
The problem could have been corrected with a computer software patch before the Polar Lander's Dec. 3, 1999, arrival at Mars had engineers realized there was a problem.
But NASA sources said Wednesday the problem was not fully uncovered until extensive post-crash tests using a similar lander built for a 2001 mission. 
Why the problem was not discovered before the Polar Lander's launch or, if it was at some engineering level, why it was not properly resolved is not yet clear.
Presumably, that issue will be addressed next week by the failure review board. 
In any case, the landing leg-microswitch scenario was reported earlier this year by various news organizations as one of several failure modes under assessment.
And that has not changed, NASA officials said Wednesday in response to a news report that claimed NASA knew about but did not disclose fatal problems with the lander's descent engines before the spacecraft arrived at Mars. 
United Press International, quoting an anonymous source, reported the braking rockets failed their acceptance testing and "rather than begin an expensive and time-consuming redesign, an unnamed space official simply altered the conditions of the testing until the engine passed.
" 
The report also said members of a NASA review team found out about the problem before the Polar Lander arrived at Mars but that agency managers decided not to disclose the issue. 
In a strongly worded denial, NASA said Wednesday concerns about the Lander's engines were publically discussed during a November news conference.
In addition, NASA said in a statement, two review teams had uncovered "no evidence relating to thruster acceptance testing irregularities as alleged by UPI.
In fact, members of the review teams are using words like 'bunk,' 'complete nonsense,' and 'wacko,' to describe their reactions" to the story. 
In the end, no one will ever know for sure what happened to the Mars Polar Lander, barring recovery of actual wreckage by future astronauts or photographic detection of debris by some future orbiter.
The last signal from the Polar Lander was transmitted before atmospheric entry and in the absence of any hard data, engineers can only make educated guesses about what might have actually gone wrong. 
But as one official said Wednesday of the landing leg deployment issue, "had everything else worked perfectly, this one would have gotten us." 
Copyright 2000, CBS Worldwide Inc., All Rights Reserved.
In his latest Against the Grain commentary, CBSNews.com's Dick Meyer takes a look at the most unpopular tax of all: the so-called death tax. 
The first major <a href="/now/story/0,1597,278532-412,00.shtml" target="external" CBS News/The New York Times poll since President Bush took office has just been completed.
A surprising and fascinating result is that 71 percent of those polled oppose the current estate tax, better known to Republican speechwriters as the death tax. 
It is, as CBS News Survey Analyst Sarah Dutton points out, "the only place in the poll where there was a real consensus."
Partisanship did not affect the results: 74 percent of Republicans object to the estate tax, as do 69 percent of Democrats.
To hammer home the point, 81 percent of those polled also believe there should be no estate tax for those who inherit small businesses, farms and ranches. 
To put this in a broader public opinion context, the poll shows that on matters of tax and fiscal policy, the public agrees on virtually nothing. 
Can you save social security, spend more on education and cut taxes?
No way, according to 43 percent; sure, say 48 percent.
Whose tax plan is fair, Bush's or the Dems?
Bush wins by a decisive margin of 44 percent to 43 percent.
Bush's cuts are fair to all Americans in the estimation of 38 percent of those polled, but they only benefit the rich according to the other 56 percent. 
To put this in a broader, real economic context, remember that fewer than 48,000 taxpayers less than 2 percent of yearly deaths pay any estate taxes.
Half the revenue from the estate tax comes from just 5,000 legacies a year leaving $5 million or more behind.
Only estates over $675,000 are taxed at all. 
Bottom line: few people in our poll will actually have to deal with estate taxes.
It's taxing the "other guy" something people usually approve of wholeheartedly that bugs people. "
Don t tax him, don't tax me, tax that guy behind the tree," runs a popular rhyme with Ways and Means Committee folks.
In this case, the guy behind the tree probably owns the whole forest and the nearby trout pond. 
But quite to the contrary, taxing inheritances is overwhelmingly unpopular.
How come? 
Democratic pollster Harrison Hickman suggested the current opposition to the estate tax is probably based on confusion and skilled political marketing.
Hickman said, "people grossly overestimate" the chances that the estate tax will effect them personally.
And he admits that President Bush "has done a pretty good of selling it."
He thinks the reason congressional Republicans have separated the estate tax repeal from the rest of the income tax package is that the estate tax will be easy to pass on its own later this year. 
Perhaps.
Or maybe it has more to do with the role that leaving some financial legacy for your children and heirs plays in our American concept of "making it," as well as being a good parent.
Perhaps people have a secret fantasy that there's a rich, reclusive dying uncle out there for them.
I don't know. 
I do know that when gazillionaires Warren Buffett and George Soros recently signed a pronouncement in The New York Times entitled, Call to preserve the Estate Tax, my instant gut reaction was to want the damn thing repealed on the spot.
They even have a Web site, www.responsiblewealth.org .
Check it out.
If you have a few hundred million crackers you don't want your kids to have, it s the place for you. 
The Sage of Omaha and his fellow travelers make the usual argument that cutting the estate tax by definition means more of the tax burden is placed on lower incomes.
That's true, but almost trivial since the revenue from the estate tax is so small in the big budget picture. 
They seem more impressed with a kind of econo-moral argument.
Buffet said that allowing inheritances is like "choosing the 2020 Olympic team by picking the eldest sons of the gold medal winners in the 2000 Olympics."
A clever debating point,
but it's hardly a justification for a highly confiscatory tax.
(I mean that in the nicest way, Uncle Warren).
Certainly there's nothing in the law to prevent anyone from giving his or her money away to anyone or any group, even the U.S. Treasury. 
The estate tax is paradoxically all-American and un-American.
Leaving an inheritance is a noble part of the American dream; gaining wealth, position and success through inheritance is not. 
That is exactly why the estate tax has had such a convoluted history in this country.
It was first levied in the 1790s, but repealed after five years.
It was imposed and repealed twice more over the centuries and it may happen again.
A key gauge of future U.S. economic activity declined 0.5 percent last month, as the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks weakened an already troubled economy. 
The New York-based Conference Board said Monday its Index of Leading Economic Indicators fell to 109.2 in September, following a revised 0.1 drop in August. 
The decrease in the September index is the largest one-month decline since January 1996, the board said. 
"The two-month decline in the index suggests that the already-weak economy is likely to remain weak into next year," said Conference Board economist Ken Goldstein. 
He said the slide in the index reflects a significant slowdown in the manufacturing and service sectors. 
The index is usually closely watched because it indicates where the overall U.S. economy is headed in the next three to six months.
It stood at 100 in 1996, its base year. 
The economy has been struggling for several months before the Sept. 11 attacks.
Many economists have said they believe that a recession is unavoidable with the new uncertainties raised by the disaster. 
The Federal Reserve bank has cut a key interest rates nine times this year in an effort to shore up the economy, actions lauded by the Conference Board. 
"Without the aggressive expansionary policy adopted by the Federal Reserve ... this drop would have been much deeper," it said in a statement accompanying the report. 
The board said six of the 10 components of the leading index contributed to the decrease in September: stock prices, average weekly initial claims for unemployment insurance, index of consumer expectations, average weekly manufacturing hours, building permits and manufacturers' new orders for nondefense capital goods. 
Money supply and interest rate spread were the only components that rose, while vendor performance and manufacturers' new orders for consumer goods and materials held steady for the month. 
The coincident index, which measures current economic activity, fell 0.1 percent from a revised August number to 116.6 in September.
The index of lagging indicators, which reflects changes that have already occurred, slipped 0.2 percent in September to 104. 
The Conference Board is a nonprofit research and business group, with more than 2,700 corporate and other members around the world.
Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan says if Congress does decide to pass an economic stimulus package, it may take as much as $100 billion to produce the economic growth needed to recover from the effects of the Sept. 11 terror attacks. 
Meeting with members of the Senate Finance Committee Tuesday, the central bank chief cautioned that more time is needed to gather data and anecdotal information that would show how badly the U.S. economy was shaken by the hijack attacks on New York and Washington that left nearly 7,000 people missing or dead. 
A Fed spokesman says Greenspan's estimated $100 billion price tag includes money already approved by Congress for counter-terrorism and recovery efforts in the wake of the attacks, about $40 billion to date. 
The spokesman said Greenspan told lawmakers any possible package should be "of significant size in order to have the intended economic effect.
" 
"In giving a rough approximation of what could be considered significant, the chairman noted that 1 percent of GDP, or roughly $100 billion, might be an appropriate benchmark, depending on the nature of the programs.
This number includes the additional spending approved by Congress in the last two weeks," the Fed spokesman said. 
The finance panel, which would play a major role in putting together any further package of tax cuts and other measures to give the economy a boost, met with Greenspan and former Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin to discuss the state of the economy and the merits of a stimulus package. 
Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus, a Montana Democrat, said the conclusion from the meeting was to wait a few more weeks to gather more information and that if something needs to be done it should be short-term and enough to make a difference. 
He also said lawmakers were told to weigh those considerations against the impact of additional government spending and tax cuts on long-term interest rates such as mortgage rates, which can be influenced by government borrowing and balance sheets. 
"That's the balancing act we are all faced with," Baucus told reporters following the meeting. 
Sen. Olympia Snow, a Maine Republican who sits on the Finance Committee, said Greenspan told them that something in the order of $100 billion would be needed to have an impact on the $10 trillion U.S. economy. 
He told them it would take at least another week to get a better sense of the health of the economy following the attacks, she said. 
Senate Republican Leader Trent Lott of Mississippi said many lawmakers felt the economy would need help. 
"I think everybody is willing to wait a week or two to get and assessment of how things are coming back.
But there is also a feeling by a lot of us that we are going to probably have to put a little more juice in the economy with some sort of economic stimulus," Lott said. 
Sen. Charles Grassley of Iowa, the top Republican on the Finance Committee, said there was general agreement that any package should be short-term, but enough to give the economy a jolt. 
"I think it has to be temporary, but significant enough to make a difference," he told reporters following the meeting.
He said the amount of a stimulus being discussed was much higher than he anticipated. 
Lawmakers said Greenspan and Rubin stressed the importance of restoring consumer and business confidence in the economy and in airline safety. 
Snowe said Greenspan emphasized that the number one priority for the economy was to get the aviation industry back on track.
Airlines were ordered to ground planes immediately after three hijacked planes slammed into the World Trade Center and Pentagon and a fourth crashed in Pennsylvania.
The industry has announced massive layoffs in the face of slumping demand. 
Congress has already approved $15 billion to help airlines recover. 
By Donna Smith ?
MMI Reuters Limited.
All Rights Reserved.
"It was so painful.
The pain wouldn't go away," Outback survivor Michael Skupin told CBS Early Show anchor Jane Clayson on Friday. 
The Kucha tribe member was describing what happened when he injured himself while cooking fish over an open fire.
"The wind suddenly changed direction.
I inhaled a whole bunch of smoke.
I stood up quickly and I looked down at the fire and my last thought was, 'Wow, I feel a little bit dizzy.'
I fell into the fire face-first." 
Eliminated by this injury from Survivor:
The Australian Outback, Skupin described how his glasses and the brim of his hat - which he usually never wore - helped to protect his face.
"I don't know why I wore it.
It was, you know, divine intervention I was wearing the hat and glasses." 
"The pain was very, very intense," he said.
"When I ran into that first pool of water it was so hot.
The water wasn't soothing.
That's why I had to go jump into the deeper body of water to get my hands soothed until medical treatment could arrive." 
Clayson asked him whether he had called for the medics or did he think he could tough it out. 
"I kept looking at my hands and I kept thinking, 'How am I still going to play this game?
What am I going to do?
What gloves can I wear?'
I was not ready to give up," he replied in true "Survivor" fashion. 
While waiting to be evacuated, he worried about how his accident would affect the show.
"I remember laying on that stretcher and saying, 'I'm sorry' because I thought I had wrecked the show.
I thought I just wrecked it.
I just remember my eyes tearing up and saying, 'I'm so sorry.'
And I never thought I wasn't coming back. 
As his stunned tribe mates looked on, Skupin was airlifted to a hospital in Cairns, about an hour and 15 minutes from the Survivor base camp.
His wounds were so serious that the chief of surgery sent him to a burn center in Brisbane, another three and half hours away. 
And still he was in denial.
"I was like, 'Whoa, OK.
We gotta make this fast because I gotta get back,'" even though, "my hands had quadrupled in size - it was just one huge blister." 
It wasn't until the next day that he realized he wouldn't be going back. "
When it finally hit me, it was a mourning period.
I still wanted to play.
I thought I let the tribe down.
I felt like I still had play left in me and it was hard."
After a lot of praying, he said, a calm came over him and "I haven't looked back since."
CBS: Why do you want to go to space? 
TITO:
It's something I've wanted to do since I was a teenager.
And you have a dream that you establish early in your life, it's hard to let go of it.
I've been interested in space interested enough that I went to university and ended up getting both a bachelors and a masters degree in aerospace engineering.
I worked at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory for five years.
That was really the beginning of my career, though it's just a continuation of one's original dream. 
CBS: It's a huge leap, though, between doing the math and plotting things on paper and actually getting out there and putting your own life on the line, really.
What is it that fascinates you?
What do you want to see? 
TITO:
When you actually design trajectories, as I did, you have to visualize your spacecraft and visualize the planet that you're orbiting in my case, it was planet Mars and Venus.
You have to identify with what you're seeing when you design the mission.
So by actually going into space, it's really just living out what I'd worked on for so many years. 
CBS: What are you hoping to pioneer up there, because you are one of a kind the only one of your kind in a way.
What do you think you're doing in a larger context? 
TITO:
Originally, it was just a desire to go into space.
And I really I think didn't understand the broader implications.
And over the last nine months, I realized that it is something unique and pioneering.
I'm actually getting more and more excited about the future as far as opening up space to private citizens, developing the enthusiasm for other people to follow in my footsteps, and open up space to the general public. 
CBS: Cost is a huge factor.
You're lucky enough to be able to afford it and be the first.
How do you think the cost of space tourism might be brought down so that people like me might be able to afford it? 
TITO:
I don't know exactly what you can afford, but there are a lot of people around the world who could afford this flight at the current price if they were willing to put in the time and the effort.
I have a feeling that the amount of training that's required to do this is more of a barrier than the cost.
But I think that the cost will come down as the demand increases that there will be market forces that will develop vehicles that will be able to launch multiple numbers of people.
And the cost per person will be a lot less. 
CBS: How do you think America sees you as just some rich guy who is freeloading off the poor Russians who don't have enough money to run their space program? 
TITO:
Well, the Russians have flown "guest cosmonauts" ever since the 1980s.
I think as far as freeloading, I think I'm paying my way.
So I think it's just a continuation of a policy that they have had.
If you look back at the early days of powered flight, the wealthy people were the ones who could afford to go in an airplane 80, 90 years ago.
It was that interest that ultimately led to the development of commercial aviation, where everyone could afford it.
Now it might be another 50 or 80 years before it gets down to a reasonable price.
But that's how it starts. 
CBS: How do you think the American people see you? 
TITO:
Well, I've seen some polls, and a poll that included about 25,000 people had over 80 percent supporting my flight.
So that's a pretty good number.
So I would say on the basis of that positively. 
CBS:
Something I've read about you said you had even considered designing a spacecraft a space shuttle that would take other people into space.
Are you serious about that? 
TITO:
Well I looked at that, and it wasn't an idea to put people in orbit, because that is a much more complicated engineering effort.
But I was looking at the possibility of developing a sub-orbital vehicle that might go up about 62 miles, which is the official height to be in space, and allow someone to be weightless for about five minutes, and then come down a much less ambitious flight than orbit.
But as I studied that, I found out that the costs involved and the complexity involved was much greater than I thought.
So I think an effort like that will require a lot more money and a lot more engineering.
I'm less enthusiastic about that possibility than I was when I first looked at it. 
CBS: Why do you think NASA and the other International Space Station partners are so reluctant to let you go into space? 
TITO:
I don't know.
It seems like maybe they are looking at it the wrong way.
Maybe they are concerned about a Challenger-type tragedy.
If they were to look at it from the standpoint of the positive reaction that is developing by the American public or the people throughout the world for space and the International Space Station, I think they would see that it's really a plus for them
it's really a positive.
And I don't really understand why they're not seeing this. 
CBS: How much of it has to do not so much with you, whether you are fit or trained, but just with a pretty naked power struggle: who gets to call the shot on how things are done on the ISS? 
TITO:
I am pretty sure that that is a factor, but that is something that is out of my area, and that that thing will resolve itself. 
CBS: You must have thought a lot on what is going on, because you what to make things go as smoothly as possible, what is your reading on how much solidarity there is in NASA against your going, or is it as controversial there as it is among the public? 
TITO:
I don't think there is solidarity in NASA against my going
, I've met a lot of people from NASA
the have been very supportive, a lot of people here in Star City, astronauts that I know and talk to American astronauts.
I think it might be a problem at the top level more than it is across NASA
, I heard that the younger people are much more enthusiastic seeing me fly, because there is more of a possibility for themselves in future years to be able to do the same. 
CBS: What is it at the top of NASA? 
TITO:
As I said I don't understand If I were a NASA administrator I would be enthusiastic about this flight, and I would take full advantage of it
I just don't understand why they don't look at the positive side, particularly at a period when the budgets are being cut and there is really a lack of enthusiasm among the Americans about space, and here is an opportunity to get things going. 
CBS: How real are their alleged fears that you are not ready to go to the ISS at this stage, when there is a lot of work still to do? 
CBS: I was interested to see that the crew aboard the ISS at the moment seemed quite happy for you to come. 
TITO:
I felt very good about that; it was nice to hear about that.
In fact a couple of days ago I was at Mission Control and had an opportunity to talk on the radio to the crew of the ISS
and I thanked them for that statement,
it was a warm encouraging for me. 
CBS: You think the will be in trouble with NASA? 
TITO:
Actually I think the NASA gave them to go ahead to welcome me, that is my feeling. 
CBS: Why, that is a weird mixed signal, isn't it? 
TITO:
Remember that the problems that NASA had are several weeks old and I think that things have probably shifted since then, I haven't heard anything negative from NASA for several weeks now. 
CBS: Do you get the impression that they are actually in favor of you going now? 
TITO:
I think that since the Houston incident they have learned more about my training and my physical fitness and my medical condition.
And I think now they better understand of what the Russians are talking about when the Russians say that I am qualified. 
CBS: What did you miss when you didn't participate at Johnson Space Center that week, what did you not do? 
TITO:
well.
It is hard to say since I was not there
but my crewmates ended up in getting some sorts of briefings, it wasn't (extensive) in terms of training, but as I see it I will not spend as much time if any in the American segment, because most of the time I will spend in the Russian segment where the habitation module is. 
CBS: So you don't feel compromised in any way having to miss that week? 
TITO:
No, not at all.
And if there is any training that is needed we can do it on orbit. 
CBS: What has your training being like? 
TITO:
It's been an experience for me it was a great experience.
In the beginning it was a culture shock living a very nice life style in Los Angeles and then coming to Star City and moving into a small, two-room apartment, having to make my own bed, cook my own food
it was a change.
Not that I haven't done this before, because I was in college, when I was young
I lived that way
it was really a return to my youth, which took a little bit of adjustment, but I got into the swing of things, I really started to enjoy it.
Training itself has a lot of aspects to it, training in classroom, simulations, physical training it is really an experience.
And I've learned so much in the last eight months, probably more than in the last twenty years.
This is something brand new, I enjoy it. 
CBS: Avionics, engineering and space engineering in general must have gone a long way since you left the business? 
TITO:
Not really.
These vehicles were designed thirty years ago and there was really nothing really new except I had worked on the unmanned program and this gave an opportunity to understand how a manned space vehicle operates, but the technology is really old technology and as far as my engineering training, it fit right in when I learned. 
CBS: When you graduated did you use calculators or slide rules? 
TITO: I graduated before the calculator, we had slide roles. 
CBS: Well this has changed..
Actually in Russia they still use slide rules, don't they? 
TITO:
really?
I haven't seen any. 
CBS: Even at Mission Control they do occasionally. 
TITO:
I have my slide rules somewhere in the closet at home, I have to dig that out. 
CBS: You should have one of these pockets on your suit. 
TITO:
No, you wear it on your belt.
Everyone used to wear it on the belt. 
CBS: What about the physical aspects of training?
You must have to do all the things that we have seen on video. 
TITO:
Actually, that was the easiest part.
I've been running for the last twenty years, I've been weightlifting for the last five years, so my regular routine has been very heavy in terms of physical training, so what I am experiencing here at Star City is pretty much the same.
I go out running and what interested me most is that I couldn't find anyone else running, and I thought there would be a lot of people running in the morning, but they don't run as much in Russia as they do in California. 
CBS: What was the hardest part of the whole program? 
TITO:
The hardest part was dealing with the uncertainty of whether I was going to fly or not.
And this uncertainty began almost on day one, because I arrived here in August, and there was talk at that time about whether MIR would continue and whether the funding be available, so I had to live with that.
And then when it started to look like MIR was not going to continue they had still scheduled their mission in January
and I was trained for that mission with the idea that possibly it might be the last mission and then it looked more and more like that wasn't going to happen, but I had to keep pressing towards my goal
and I think that was the most difficult: to just continue on, not get discouraged and pack my bags and go home.
To say: look, if there is any possibility that I can fly I am going to realize it and I am not going to give up and then the ISS opportunity was first presented to me in November and that was four or five months ago, and looked like a reach at that time, but I kept pushing for that as I saw that MIR was going to be de-orbited. 
CBS: Was that a strange bonus in a way?
When we were talking earlier you referred to MIR as an old person who had to go.
Do you feel as if you've been handed a bonus in not being sent to MIR but being sent to the ISS? 
TITO:
Absolutely.
It is night and day.
I don't think I realized when I signed up for MIR what condition it really was in and what it would've been like spending a week or two on board of MIR, so I am very fortunate that I didn't truly understand that and ended up going to the ISS. 
CBS: How much did you pay the Russians for this voyage? 
TITO:
It is a question I never answer, it is confidential and it is written into the contract that we don't disclose any financial arrangements, so I have to decline. 
CBS: Why do they keep it secret? 
TITO: You will have to ask the people who wrote the contract. 
CBS: Did you ever felt that you are just a means to the Russians, that they really see your wallet more than they see you? 
TITO:
I think that my wallet is a big part of this and when I first arrived they looked at that as the only consideration, but things have changed over the eight months since I first started and at least as I view it, I have developed a very close relationship not only with some of the senior Russian space officials, but also with the crew, the instructors and a wide range of people, and I think they learned to understand what my dream was and began to identify it with me as a human being as opposed to just a wealthy person that wanted to fly in space. 
CBS: Has your contact with the Russians and friendship with then made you feel some of their sadness that their space program has been so reduced and so bruised and has ended up so poor? 
TITO:
Most definitely yes.
Having had my original interest in space spurred by the launching of Sputnik in 1957 and later on the flight of Yuri Gagarin, to see a nation that (was) really a leader in space flight be in a situation when they (have) virtually no space flight, maybe their budget is one percent of the US space budget, and to see these people that are as dedicated as I remember I was back in the days when I worked at NASA, to see them looking at the future not in a positive way. 
CBS: How do you feel, that the realization of this long held dream of yours is taking place in some controversial and in some ways bitter atmosphere? 
TITO:
Well I don't see it as being that controversial..
By the time we launch a lot of that will be forgotten and the enthusiasm that I see existing through the media and through the chat lines that I read on the Internet that will even be more pronounced. 
TITO:
You would've liked to go with NASA's full blasting instead of going with this kind of grudging reluctance to let you go. 
TITO:
I would've expected that NASA would've been enthusiastic
and I think when all is said and done they will benefit by this,
so it doesn't bother me seeing a few senior people at NASA having difficulty with it.
What's important is, that this flight increases the interest in the American people in space and in the international space station, and I know that this would be a plus for NASA, a plus for the ISS, and that what's important to me. 
CBS: You must have run into some grumpy Russian people, too, involved in the space program, who have worked hard in extremely difficult conditions as the country was getting poor and must resent you like hell, because you just got money to buy yourself what they simply couldn't get through hard work and application? 
TITO:
I have not sensed that at all, in fact, what's amazing about Russia being, say a new country in a way, opening its doors to free enterprise, that they look up to people that have been successful, and they look at myself, by and large, as the person that started out without any money, coming from an immigrant family, being successful, on my own.
They look at that as something they admire as I admired when I was young when I saw people that were self-made. 
CBS: We can, though, understand that kind of resentment, perhaps it might be more evident in America, that people might think: "Why should people be able to buy, what is, after all, a privilege that is only accorded to the very few?" 
TITO:
Well, there are people that are envious of wealth.
I never was.
I was always actually quite excited seeing somebody being successful
and I just said "maybe I will". 
CBS: How is your Russian? 
TITO:
Terrible. 
CBS: What can you say? 
TITO: "Horosho" O.K. 
CBS:
Well, "spacibo" or thank you Mr. Tito, for speaking with us.
As the Bush team tries to win support for their massive tax-cut program, they'd better keep their eyes on the passel of corporate lobbyists lying in wait.
Commentary by CBSNews.com's Dick Meyer. 
The last time a Republican governor rode into Washington from the West promising to cut taxes before sun up, it caused a bloodbath of red ink that lasted for nearly 20 years.
The story of the Reagan tax cuts of 1981 is a cautionary tale that Beltway business lobbyists hope is long forgotten, because they're getting ready to play old tricks on a new sheriff. 
Ronald Reagan was the last president to be elected with a popular ideology so simple it fit on a button: cut taxes, shrink government, crush commies.
Tax reductions for individuals were always the heart of Reaganism and a whole economic theory was created to dress up this simple, popular position.
It was called supply-side economics.
Some called it Reaganomics; and Mr. Reagan's running mate, George H.W. Bush, referred to it as voodoo economics. 
The theory basically held that cutting taxes would stimulate the economy so powerfully that government tax revenues would increase despite the rate cuts for individuals, thereby eliminating budget deficits. 
It didn't quite work out that way. 
But Mr. Reagan's message was so popular in 1980 that he not only won the White House in a landslide, he also gave the Republicans control of the Senate for the first time since the 1950s.
The golden rule of American politics instantly became tax cuts win elections. 
That was a dangerous thing.
When the politicians got to work in 1981, they tried to outdo each other on tax cuts and eventually got into a now famous bidding war to see who could sell off bigger cuts to the business lobbyists. 
This was especially true in the House of Representatives, still controlled by the Democrats, who needed an incentive to go along with the Reagan cuts.
So the Reagan team gave the green light to the idea of giving tax cuts to businesses, not just individuals. 
The pols were essentially allowed to auction off loopholes and tax breaks to the lobbyists in exchange for their votes.
David Stockman, who was then in charge of Mr. Reagan's budget, wrote in his book, The Triumph of Politics : "The last 10 percent or 20 percent of the votes needed for a majority would have to be bought, period." 
There were scads of tax breaks targeted at narrow interests real estate, oil, equipment leasing, windmills and jojoba beans.
The mother-of-all-loopholes was called "10-5-3" a deal to allow business to write off big capital purchases much more quickly.
When there was a last minute glitch, CEOs flooded the halls outside the House Ways and Means Committee in an egregious excess of money politics that came to be known as the Lear Jet Weekend.
The Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 spawned other staples in the lexicon of lobbying, like Gucci Gulch and Christmas Tree Legislation. 
The economy did get pumped up, albeit briefly; then the deficits went nuclear.
Corporate and personal tax shelters proliferated.
Draconian cuts in domestic spending were imposed, but still couldn't control the deficits.
Taxes were hiked in 1986 and again in the 1990s.
Deficits continued until the 1990s economic expansion had lasted six or seven years. 
Now it's 2001 and the same lobbyists are hatching the same schemes.
The big-ticket item this year is again a way to write off business purchases faster, but this time focused on high-tech.
The sharks smell the blood in the water. 
So far, President Bush and his principle economic adviser, Larry Lindsey, insist that corporate tax cuts are verboten this year.
We'll see.
But there are several good reasons to think they're right, apart from their pledges. 
For one thing, tax cuts in general are simply not as popular today as they were 20 years ago.
For example, a December 2000 CBS News/ The New York Times poll showed that 61 percent of Americans favor the Bush tax cuts, while 28 percent oppose.
But recent polls also found that only nine percent of the public felt tax reduction was the most important policy goal.
By contrast, in January 1981, 76 percent of the public wanted a tax cut and only 16 percent did not. 
Further, in 1981 the budget deficits
some warned against were really a very abstract evil, dimly associated with prudish Taft Republicanism from the olden days.
But for the past 15 years, deficits have been a far more tangible malady, associated with recession, stock market crashes, Social Security shortfalls and painful spending cuts.
No one believes or even tries to argue any more that tax cuts also cut deficits.
So there will be greater pressure this time not to inflate the tax cuts. 
Another helpful force, ironically, is that Republicans control both the House and the Senate, so Mr. Bush may not have to buy as many votes as President Reagan did 20 years ago. 
But Mr. Bush has made it clear he wants to do bidness and he wants to do it fast.
He better just remember he's riding into Gucci Gulch and there's a lobbyist lurking behind every boulder. 
MMI Viacom Internet Services Inc.
All Rights Reserved.
Powell added: "When you look at the list of candidates, one resides in the region." 
Asked whether he was referring to bin Laden, the Saudi expatriate who runs a terrorist network from Afghanistan, Powell replied: "Yes." 
During the press conference, Powell left little doubt the U.S. is convinced bin Laden was behind these attacks and little doubt about what the U.S. plans to do. 
"We will go after that group, that network and those who have harbored, supported and aided that network to rip the network up," he said. 
U.S. officials say they are drafting plans to attack not just bin Laden, reports CBS News National Security Correspondent David Martin , but the Taliban rulers of Afghanistan who allow him to operate from their territory either killing bin Laden and destroying his camps or forcing the Taliban to turn him over.
And, said Powell, that's not all. 
"When we're through with that network, we'll continue with a global assault on terrorism in general." 
A senior official named the Iranian backed group Hezbollah, which in 1983 killed more than 200 American Marines in Lebanon, and Hamas, which sends suicide bombers against Israeli civilians, as two of the terrorist groups the U.S. intends to go after. 
In what could be the first break in the investigation into the crash of United Airlines Flight 93 in rural Pennsylvania, authorities announced Thursday that they have recovered the flight data recorder from the crash scene.
Forty-five people were killed aboard the jetliner. 
An FBI agent says the recorder was found in the late afternoon in the eight-foot-deep crater caused by the crash.
The "black box" will be analyzed by the National Transportation Safety Board. 
At the Pentagon, searchers received a signal from the black box of the airliner that crashed there. 
But search crews will not be able to retrieve the black box, which could contain information about the last minutes of the hijacked commercial jetliner, until they are able to enter the collapsed area of the Pentagon, where the plane's fuselage rests. 
They were to begin moving into the collapsed area sometime Thursday night, said Arlington County Fire Capt.
Scott McKay. 
Investigators are also looking into the possibility and it's only a possibility that other hijackings may have been aborted.
The planes may have been diverted at the last minute after the other hijackings, or the terrorists may have gotten cold feet.
There's no direct proof of either scenario yet, but sorting through anecdotal material yields suggestions to that effect. 
Names of suspected terrorists with possible ties to bin Laden's organization were found on the passenger rosters of the hijacked planes and intelligence intercepts showed affiliates of bin Laden saying they had hit two targets, sources said. 
There appears to have been very little effort if any to hide their identities.
At least seven of them, for example, purchased their tickets out of Boston with the same credit card. 
Those credit cards and the flight manifests have provided the most significant evidence so far, and have led to what is said by high level federal law enforcement official to be "an ocean of names." 
Authorities say they have every reason to believe the hijackers were assisted and sheltered by associates in the United States, but it's not known if those associates still in the U.S.
Some of the hijackers were in this country "for more than one year." 
While there have been no arrests, Ashcroft said, authorities have interviewed many people in connection with the hijacking of four airliners and the attacks on the World Trade Center in New York and the Pentagon. 
A total of 18 hijackers were on the planes, Ashcroft said.
There were five on each of two planes and four each on the other two.
All have been identified. 
The FBI has announced that they will release photographs and names of all 18 hijackers. 
He said he was heartened by the public's interest in tracking down those responsible. 
"The FBI is working thousands and thousands of leads," he said. 
Ashcroft said the FBI's 800-number hot line had received 2,055 calls.
In addition, its Web site ( www.ifccfbi.gov ) had received more than 22,700 tips, he said. 
Ashcroft said authorities believe the hijackers were trained pilots. 
A Venice, Fla., man said FBI agents told him that two men who stayed in his home while training at a local flight school were the hijackers.
Charlie Voss said the agents identified the men as Mohamed Ata and one known as Marwan. 
The FBI interviewed Voss about two men who stayed with him and his wife for a week in July 2000 while taking small-plane flight training at the municipal airport. 
FBI agents "informed me that there were two individuals that were students at Huffman Aviation, my employer, and FBI told me they were involved in yesterday's tragedy," Voss said. 
The couple accepted the two men as house guests as a favor to the company, Voss said.
The men, who stayed just a few days, trained at the airport and came to the house to sleep, he said. 
FBI agents obtained information from Internet providers, conducted searches, and questioned people in Florida and Massachusetts.
Early evidence, including communications among Osama bin Laden supporters, indicated the attacks were tied to the wealthy Arab and accused terrorist. 
Acting on a tip from the FBI, police in Hamburg searched an apartment Wednesday where two men believed to be linked to the terror attacks in the United States once lived, police said in a statement. 
Police said the apartment had been uninhabited since February 2001, and that the two men were believed to have lived in Florida from July 2000 to January 2001. 
In Boston, law enforcement officials said a hotel room in the Boston area believed to have been used by one of the hijackers was searched by the FBI Wednesday afternoon.
The room was vacant but included information linking it to a name on the manifest of one of the hijacked flights. 
Law enforcement officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said they were investigating whether one group of hijackers crossed the Canadian border at a checkpoint and made their way to Boston, where an American Airlines flight was hijacked and flown into the World Trade Center in New York. 
The officials confirmed a car believed to belong to the hijackers was confiscated in Boston and contained an Arabic language flight manual. 
Abu Dhabi Television in the United Arab Emirates reported that two men with Saudi Arabian passports and international drivers licenses issued in the UAE were linked to the Mitsubishi sedan found at the Boston airport.
In her latest Political Points commentary, CBS News Senior Political Editor Dotty Lynch says the Democrats and Republicans are both now looking to co-opt the middle. 
New polls this week suggest that President Bush's numbers are up a bit.
And his political advisors argue that the best way for this to continue is to "talk Democratic." 
On July 8 the Washington Post's Tom Edsall reported that "Republican strategists are warning that the electorate is moving steadily to the left; and that the party needs to adopt new rhetoric and tactics to attract the growing number of working women, Hispanics, secular voters and socially tolerant, well-educated professionals." 
Bush's political advisors say that while he has solidified his base (83 percent of Republicans supported him in the last CBS New /New York Times poll), Independents and Democrats slipped away during the last few months.
Taking back the issue agenda with a discount credit card for prescription drugs for seniors, leaks about policies to overhaul Medicare and Social Security, trying to get a compromise on a Patients Bill of Rights and, of course, keeping up the focus on Hispanics, is the order of the day. 
The last thing the Bushies want is to get bogged down in new culture wars over stem-cell research and faith-based initiatives.
Headlines that the White House was ready to cut a deal with the Salvation Army to allow them skirt workplace rules protecting gays were definitely not in the playbook. 
"If he governed as he campaigned he'd be doing fine," said Sen. Evan Bayh, D-Ind.
"But he's lost the 'com' from compassionate conservative.
He's become a passionate conservative." 
Democrats and Republicans are now engaged in a ritual dance of positioning.
Michael Barone, in the introduction to the Almanac of American Politics 2002, says that that this country is "divided down the middle," 49 percent Republican, 49 percent Democratic in the recent votes for the White House and Congress.
"We haven't had such stasis in successive election results since the 1880s, which was also the last decade when a president was elected despite trailing in the popular vote and the Senate was equally divided." 
Barone also says there are major cultural difference between the two groups, especially in the area of religion. "
One group is observant, tradition-bound and moralistic.
The other is unobservant, liberation-minded, relativistic." 
Both parties are now looking to co-opt the middle the president by embracing some pro-government, traditionally Democratic issues; and centrist Democrats by returning to values and issues like community policing and fatherhood initiatives, and by labeling Bush as a captive of the right wing. 
The Democratic Leadership Council is holding a meeting in Indianapolis, July 15-17, which will include 250 state and local officials who will be "trained in the language of values and ideas" and hear from such national players as Sens.
Joe Leiberman, Hillary Clinton and Tom Daschle.
The DLC says it is concerned about "a cultural problem affecting the Democratic Party" and feels that Gore lost in 2000 because he abandoned the issues of crime and welfare, made some working class people feel the Democrats were hostile to their values, and favored economic redistribution rather than expanded opportunity. 
The other side of their strategy is to try to portray Bush and the Republicans as socially intolerant and captives of the right.
A test of this will come in the New Jersey gubernatorial race where conservative Republican Brett Schundler beat the more moderate Republican Bob Franks and will face DLCer Jim McGreevey in November. 
Schundler, the 42-year-old mayor of heavily Democratic Jersey City, is a darling of the national conservatives and used images of Ronald Reagan in his primary campaign.
Democrats are expected to try to tar him as an extremist, especially on the issues of abortion and gun control, and some Republicans want him to trim his conservative sails for the general election. 
Campaign spokesman Bob Guhl, says Schundler's general election strategy won't change much.
He will continue an "anti-establishment campaign" focusing on the same four issues that won him the primary: lowering property taxes, reforming education, reducing suburban sprawl and removing the tolls from the Garden State Parkway.
Guhl says if he talks about these issues while McGreevey hammers away on abortion and gun control, Schundler will come through as more in touch with the people of New Jersey because he's talking the issues that really matter to them. 
The DLC warns Democrats that they need to frame these social issues in less polarizing ways that won't turn off mainstream voters.
For example, casting abortion as something that should be "safe, legal and rare," rather something that is every woman's right.
Gun control must not imply that gun owners are evil; they suggest using the words "gun safety" rather than "gun control." 
Much of this positioning is rhetoric loaded with boomer jargon.
Reality often has a way of ruining some of the coolest catch phrases.
Despite all of the DLC's efforts, Schundler's rallying cry of ending the tolls on the Garden State Parkway may be more "empowering to the vital center" than fatherhood initiatives and communitarianism.
In this commentary, CBSNews.com's Dick Meyer reflects on the latest pardon flap involving former President Bill Clinton, Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton, D-N.Y., and Mrs. Clinton's brother, Hugh Rodham I vowed after lunch on Wednesday never to opine publicly about Bill Clinton again.
Then came Hugh. 
If I were as smart as Bill Clinton, I d just say this column isn t about Bill Clinton; it is about Hugh Rodham and his sister, Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton (D-NY) and thus a wholly legitimate topic for public discourse, depending on what the meaning of is is. 
But I m not that smart.
Not many are.
So I ll just break my dumb little vow. 
What sleazes. 
What else is there to say?
Why spend time trying to say it more cleverly?
Why bother trying to make their defenders see the light?
Why quibble about the details anymore? 
Well, it is kind of fun.
And that s the only honest reason left for paid-by-the-word wisecrackers to continue yammering about these unsavory people. 
Who else but the Clintons of Hope, Little Rock, Washington, Chappaqua, and now Harlem bring us a cast of scoundrels ranging from Dallas reject Gennifer Flowers up through the Walrusesque Hugh Rodham? 
Who else
but the Clintons have the dumb luck to be pursued by bumbling weirdos like Ken Starr, Dan Burton, Alphonse D Amato, and Newt Gingrich? 
One could attempt to write a straight piece of political analysis about the consequences of this latest flap on Senator Clinton s future or ex-President Clinton s stature.
But there are no consequences for these people.
Many, many writers far more eloquent and observant than I have said it a million times before
: the Clintons feel no shame, embarrassment, humiliation, or remorse. 
But the rest of us do. 
So we wonder why we stayed with this couple so long.
A good self-help book on politics would be called, Why Nice Citizens Love Bad Politicians.
Why do we have such low political self-esteem?
Didn t the father of our country love us well enough? 
A true blue Democrat said to me tonight, We ve been had.
The truth is, like most people, he said the same thing during Monica.
And John Huang.
And Webb Hubbell.
And the Lincoln Bedroom.
And the silverware.
And Marc Rich. 
It is not an easy thing to explain or explain away - our tolerance of these people.
But at least we look in the mirror and try.
Trapped inside borders with relief workers gone, supplies dwindling fast and war looming, Afghans who are among the world's toughest survivors, now face potential death in large numbers. 
"It is impossible to overestimate just how bad it is," said Rupert Colville of the U.N. refugee agency.
"It's almost inconceivable, and nobody can get in to film or describe it." 
No matter what happens, aid officials added, events in Afghanistan could fast deteriorate into one of the worst humanitarian crises ever. 
Already, Colville and others say, the scale threatens to approach the Rwandan catastrophe or the worst days of Bosnia.
Winter is weeks away, and border crossings are closed.
Relief efforts are all but paralyzed. 
In the most remote areas, aid workers report, conditions approach famine and are deteriorating by the day.
Hundreds of thousands of Afghans are believed massed along the borders, trying to escape.
Afghanistan's neighbors have refused to let them cross. 
"Millions are in extraordinarily bad shape," Colville said by telephone from the Pakistani city of Quetta.
"They are not Taliban, not fighters, not friends of Osama bin Laden.
Just ordinary Afghans." 
Many people are caught in destitute hamlets up to a week's donkey ride from the nearest lean-to shop.
"I've seen Afghans who didn't know what a doctor was, let alone had ever seen one," Colville said. 
If airstrikes or military incursions start, already weakened civilians will have to make their way to distant relief centers.
Many are too old or sick to move and those who stay with them may die. 
Aid workers note that in the Balkans and Rwanda, calamity came quickly and many people managed to escape to refugee camps from almost normal daily lives.
In Afghanistan, it is different. 
"These people have been crippled by 23 years of conflict, a decade of neglect by the international community and four years of devastating drought," Colville said. 
Mike Sackett, coordinator of U.N. operations in Afghanistan, reached in Islamabad before flying to Iran to press for more help, made a similarly grim assessment. 
"It was already a terrible crisis and now it is worse," he said. 
Huge numbers of exhausted refugees are on the road.
Some have fled cities for rural areas.
Others are trying to leave the country.
Large numbers are weak and vulnerable from years of hardship. 
"These aren't well-fed Bosnians with 20 or 30 pounds of spare body weight," said Peter Kessler, U.N. refugee agency spokesman in Islamabad.
He 7 million of the estimated 21 million people in Afghanistan need aid. 
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan said Thursday the United Nations will need more than a half-billion dollars for air drops and other aid for the refugees if the United States attacks, and he appealed to donor countries to help raise the money. 
The United Nations Children Fund (UNICEF) announced it would send 200 tons of aid to opposition-controlled northern Afghanistan in a huge convoy, leaving the northwestern Pakistani city of Peshawar Saturday. 
Fear of war forced all expatriate U.N. staff and voluntary aid workers to flee Afghanistan, leaving a local staff with dwindling stocks. 
U.N. officials say no one is sure how many Afghans are refugees. 
Officially, about 4 million refugees are outside Afghanistan, with at least 1 million - now perhaps many more - displaced within the country.
About 4.7 million returned after the Soviet invaders departed in 1989, U.N. figures show, but some of those have left again. 
"We already have a crisis, whatever happens, and every day we are losing time - this is critical, critical, critical," said Stephanie Bunker, spokeswoman for the U.N. Humanitarian Coordinator in Afghanistan. 
Afghan society is built around shared hard times, allowing them to live through almost anything in their high mountain reaches and broad deserts. 
"If someone has one cup of tea, he'll give you half," Bunker said.
"It's their way.
Now this is breaking down.
Many have nothing.
The grip on survival itself is slipping.
Quite possibly, people will starve to death." 
Donor support of $330 million for 2001 covers only the most basic needs of the weakest, she said, adding that a well-funded relief program in Afghanistan would run into the billions each year. 
Fresh supplies trickle in from Iran through two northern points that are far from the Taliban stronghold at Kandahar in the south, near where bin Laden has made his base.
If Western allies attack near Kandahar, civilians in the area would have no access to aid. 
The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees appealed Wednesday for $269 million for 1 million people expected to flee across borders in case of hostilities. 
"When food aid can't get in, people will have to move," Colville said.
"No option.
There are millions we don't know about, not to mention the hundreds of thousands leaving cities in the past two weeks." 
Russia's border guard chief Col. Gen. Konstantin Totsky estimates that 120,000 Afghans are massed on Afghanistan's northern border and U.S. air strikes may push them across to poor former Soviet republics that lack the resources to care for them. 
Two years ago, Colville wrote a rueful column in the International Herald Tribune, taking care to note it was his personal opinion and not a U.N. statement. 
He said the Taliban killed 5,000 to 8,000 people over four days in Mazar-e-Sharif, near the Soviet border, but the atrocity went essentially unreported.
While people in Western countries cared about the Balkans, he wrote, Afghanistan was left to its own fate. 
Back in his role as a U.N. spokesman, he is more measured but still clear in warning about an approaching calamity. 
"The world can't just allow Afghanistan to rot," he said.
"What happened at Mazar-e-Sharif was very symptomatic of the outside world's neglect."
Such neglect, he concluded, "is possibly a genocidal act."
Another jolt of midnight magic, another stunning World Series win for the New York Yankees. 
Scott Brosius saved the Yankees with a two-out, two-run homer in the ninth inning, then Alfonso Soriano singled home the winning run in the 12th early Friday to give New York a 3-2 victory over the Arizona Diamondbacks and a three games-to-two edge. 
For the second straight night, the Yankees were one out away from defeat when they victimized closer Byung-Hyun Kim. 
"I can't be surprised.
It just happened the day before," Yankees manager Joe Torre said. 
Once Brosius tied it with his homer, there seemed to be little doubt about the eventual outcome. 
"It seemed like the whole situation was set again, and it happened again," Brosius said. 
Chuck Knoblauch opened the 12th with his first hit of the series and moved up on Brosius' sacrifice.
Soriano followed with a single off losing pitcher Albie Lopez, and Knoblauch scored ahead of right fielder Reggie Sanders' throw. 
Sanders had a shot at Knoblauch, but his one-hop throw could not be handled cleanly by catcher Rod Barajas. 
A night earlier, Kim served up a tying, two-run homer in the ninth to Tino Martinez.
In the 10th, Jeter homered off Kim to win it. 
Soriano made a key defensive play in the 11th as the Yankees won their Series-record 10th straight home game.
Sterling Hitchcock got the victory. 
Now, the three-time defending champions will try to wrap up another crown in Game 6 Saturday night at Bank One Ballpark. 
Randy Johnson, who pitched a three-hit shutout in Game 2 for Arizona, once again will start against Andy Pettitte. 
"We would've liked to have won them all.
But the Yankees are very tough in their house," Arizona manager Bob Brenly said. 
The Yankees became the first team in postseason history to win two straight games when trailing after eight innings, according to the Elias Sports Bureau. 
New York also has won seven straight extra-inning games in the Series, dating to 1964. 
Brenly, second-guessed for pulling Curt Schilling and bringing in Kim with a late lead a day earlier, was not afraid to make a similar move. 
The rookie manager yanked Miguel Batista with a 2-0 lead in the eighth after the Yankees put two on with two outs.
The strategy worked when Greg Swindell got Tino Martinez on a harmless fly ball. 
But the sellout crowd of 56,018 roared as the Yankees came to bat in the ninth, and the noise level got even louder when the fans realized Kim was coming in to pitch. 
Jorge Posada gave a sign of things to come, leading off with a double.
Kim retired Shane Spencer on a grounder and struck out Knoblauch, bringing up Brosius. 
At that point, Barajas walked toward the young closer and held up a finger, seeming to indicate: one more out. 
But Brosius, the 1998 World Series MVP launched a long drive to left field and immediately raised his arm in the air.
Kim couldn't believe it, and crouched on the mound for a full 30 seconds as the ballpark erupted. 
Brenly did not move.
From the dugout, he stared glassy-eyed at the wild scene unfolding in front of him. 
Then, as Barajas rushed to the mound, Brenly slowly walked out and signaled for reliever Mike Morgan. 
Before this week, only three times had there been a two-out homer in the bottom of the ninth that tied or won a Series game.
Now, add two more to the record book and add to the Yankees' mystique. 
Arizona had its chance in the 11th against Mariano Rivera, loading the bases with the help of Matt Williams' first sacrifice bunt since 1990. 
Soriano, playing back in hopes of a double play, saved the Yankees with a diving catch on Sanders' liner up the middle.
Rivera ended the threat by getting Mark Grace on an easy grounder to Brosius at third. 
Batista, a 30-year-old journeyman, outpitched Mike Mussina and kept the Yankees in their hitting funk. 
A few days ago, after Schilling and Johnson excelled, Batista chafed at the notion that Arizona was merely a two-man team.
Yet on this night, Batista and Barajas were almost too much for the Yankees. 
Barajas, a backup who hit just .160 this season, and Steve Finley homered in the fifth inning for a 2-0 lead. 
Finley hit his first career postseason homer, leading off with a drive against the facing of the upper deck in right field. 
Barajas, making his first start of the postseason only because catcher Damian Miller was scratched with a strained right calf, hit his first home run since April 21. 
Mussina, signed as a free agent to an $88.5 million, six-year contract, was expected to win big games in October and November. 
Hit hard in losing the opener, Mussina did fine in pitching eight innings. 
Batista made himself comfortable in his first appearance at Yankee Stadium, kicking at the dirt on the mound for 20 seconds before beginning his warmups. 
Barajas also felt right at ease, singling in his first at-bat and throwing out Soriano trying to steal. 
Batista added another big victory to his resume.
Along with being 2-1 in this postseason, he pitched his native Dominican Republic over Mexico for the Caribbean World Series championship in February. 
Besides pitching, Batista also is a talented writer who had a book of poems published this year.
While being skilled in rhythm and meter, he did a terrific job against Posada and Jeter. 
Paul O'Neill, possibly playing the final game of his career at Yankee Stadium, was cheered all night long.
The 38-year-old right fielder, who said after the game that he will retire after this season, drew two walks.
He also grounded into a double play, slamming his helmet in disgust. 
O'Neill tipped his cap to the sellout crowd of 56,018 when he ran in from right field after the top of the ninth. 
World Series Footnotes:
Andrew Giuliani, the mayor's teen-aged son, reached far over the front-row railing to snag two balls.
No security men were about to stop him. ...
Former Yankees stars Reggie Jackson and Don Mattingly threw out the ceremonial first balls. ...
Counsell has not had a hit since homering off Mussina in the opening inning of Game 1.
Counsell is in an 0-for-19 slump. 
By Ben Walker ?
MMI
The Associated Press.
All Rights Reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
The Federal Aviation Administration has reassigned the director of its security field office at Logan International Airport, where two of the hijacked planes in the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks departed. 
Mary Carol Turano was removed Friday from her post in charge of 15 field agents who test airport security.
She was transferred to the FAA regional office in Burlington, where she will oversee hiring of security personnel in New England. 
FAA spokesman Jim Peters refused to cite reasons for the transfer.
"She has been reassigned," he said.
"It's a personnel matter and we're not going to discuss it." 
Turano did not return a telephone call seeking comment Saturday. 
A gate area at Logan was evacuated Saturday morning after two ticketed passengers entered without going through metal detectors. 
The pair were allowed into the area through an emergency exit by a private security guard.
They were detained by state police, questioned, then released, said Jose Juves, spokesman for Massachusetts Port Authority.
He declined to give further details. 
Passengers were allowed to re-enter the US Airways gate area after authorities swept it for bombs. 
On Sept. 11, the two planes hijacked out of Boston slammed into the twin towers of the World Trade Center. 
Last week, despite heightened security, law enforcement officials carried a buck knife and a pocket full of bullets through Logan security checkpoints.
According to a Boston Globe review of 10 years of FAA data, Logan had more real or fake weapons smuggled through security than any other airport. 
Acting Gov. Jane Swift is calling in the National Guard to beef up security, and the Massachusetts Port Authority said it has increased the presence of uniformed officers at all security checkpoints.
The Russian Navy says a German newspaper report on what caused the Kursk submarine disaster is wrong. 
The German daily paper Berliner Zeitung says an internal Russian investigation has concluded that the nuclear submarine Kursk, which sank last month, was hit by a rocket fired by a Russian cruiser during military exercises. 
Russian Navy spokesman Igor Dygalo says that type of accident could not have happened. 
"In the process of exercises, such an accident is strictly excluded," says Dygalo.
"Surface ships and submarines operate within strictly defined training zones." 
He adds that Russian ships and submarines never fire live ammunition during training exercises. 
The German paper, citing information obtained by its Moscow correspondent, reports that the Russian commission which concluded a missile was to blame presented its conclusions to Russian President Vladimir Putin on Aug. 31. 
The accident that sank the Kursk, killing all 118 on board, occurred Aug. 12 during exercises in the Barents Sea. 
U.S. Navy experts believe the explosion was probably caused by an experimental torpedo the Russians were testing, reports CBS News Correspondent David Martin. 
Countering both the collision and the torpedo theories, the Berliner Zeitung report said that the Kursk was hit by a new anti-submarine rocket fired by the Russian nuclear-powered cruiser Peter the Great, which was participating in the maneuvers. 
It said the Granite rocket, which is armed with a new target-seeking warhead, dived underwater about 12 miles after being fired.
Immediately afterward, the cruiser registered two underwater explosions, both of which could be seen from the bridge of the ship. 
It was later determined that the position of the Kursk and the spot where the rocket went underwater were within 400 meters of each other.
The report does not say whether the rocket itself or systems intended to differentiate between friend and foe malfunctioned, the newspaper said. 
The commission was headed by Nikolai Patrushev, director of the Federal Security Service (FSB), the main successor to the Soviet KGB.
Putin intends to discuss the report with senior military staff upon returning from the U.N. summit in New York, the Berliner Zeitung said. 
Peter the Great had fired the rockets daily since Aug. 2 as part of the Northern Fleet's exercise, which was to practice defending against a nuclear attack on Russia. 
On Aug. 12, the maneuvers were to test the deployment of the rocket "under maximum realistic conditions" and at relative short distances, the Berliner Zeitung report said. 
Wednesday, the U.S. Navy, which had been monitoring a Russian naval exercise the Kursk was participating in, sent data on the explosion to the Kremlin. 
Two American submarines were in the area of the Barents Sea when the Kursk sank, U.S. officials have said, but they insist there was no collision. 
U.S. Navy officials believe the explosion was caused by some kind of liquid fuel used to propel the experimental weapon. 
The initial explosion would not have sunk the submarine, but it was followed 90 seconds later by a huge, rumbling explosion: the equivalent of up to 5 tons of dynamite, or 45 to 50 times larger than the original blast.
U.S. Navy officials say it was probably the warhead of the experimental weapon detonating. 
As the hunt for the cause of the disaster continued this week, more details emerged about what happened after the sub went down. 
Russian Deputy Prime Minister Ilya Klebanov, who leads the government commission handling the disaster, reversed earlier Russian statements on the accident when he said Wednesday that there never was any contact with the sailors. 
Previously, Russian navy officials had said several times that they heard tapping from inside the submarine the first few days after it went down, indicating some crew members were alive. 
Klebanov said Wednesday, "Almost certainly, once it was on the sea floor, no one was left alive."
A new study of nearly 600 teens in drug rehab found that 20 percent say they used to do drugs with one or both parents. 
The Phoenix House group of drug rehabilitation centers commissioned the survey after coming into contact with a number of patients who said they had used drugs with their parents. 
In an interview with CBSNews.com, Phoenix House spokesman Peter Kerr says of the almost 600 teenagers who participated in the study, about 5 percent said their first taste of drugs came from a parent, and most often, that drug was marijuana. 
Of the teens who got high with their parents, 76 percent used marijuana; 19 percent used crack; 16 percent used other forms of cocaine; and 6 percent used heroin. 
"In 1965, the widespread use of illicit drugs began in America," says Kerr, who acknowledges that illegal drug use was also seen in earlier times, although not on such a large scale. 
"For the most part (in the 1960s,) it was young people who were experimenting and parents and grandparents knew nothing about it," says Kerr, contrasting that with the new survey showing that kids are getting high with their parents and sometimes even their grandparents. 
"Some think back to the days (of their own drug use) as harmless or manageable," explains Kerr.
He says some parents appear to view teenage drug use as just another "rite of passage," telling themselves: "I was okay, they'll be okay." 
That thinking, according to Kerr, often walks hand in hand with the rationale that, "I'd rather have them doing it at home, than out there in the street." 
There are more than a few flaws in that logic, according to Kerr, who points out that today's drugs are actually different from the substances passed around in the 1970s and in some cases, even later. 
"Heroin, which New York City police records show being at 6 percent purity in 1993, is today 65 percent pure," says Kerr, adding that the drug is also cheaper and widely available in many areas. 
Kerr says today's marijuana also packs a stronger punch, having been bred over the years to produce higher levels of THC, marijuana's active ingredient, than was the case in the 1970s. 
Kerr stresses another factor parents should remember, namely, that "drugs never harmed people with equality and fairness" and "just because you smoked a little dope," doesn't mean you have any "idea what's going to happen to your child.
" 
"In a group of 100 teenagers who are offered a joint, cocaine, or heroin, for example," says Kerr, "most are not going to be killed or have their lives ruined by this one event.
A certain percentage will be, depending on the drug and their personal predisposition...of genetic, psychological and environmental factors." 
When it comes to teens and drug use, says Kerr, the bottom line is "they are looking up to Mommy and Daddy for good judgment." 
Other findings of the Phoenix House study include: 19 percent of teens were introduced to drug use by family members: 9 percent by siblings; 5 percent by parents; 4 percent by uncles, aunts or cousins; and 1 percent by spouses.
Fewer than 1 percent were introduced to drugs by a professional drug dealer.
Of all teens surveyed, 22 percent of whites reported doing drugs with parents; 22 percent of Hispanics reported doing drugs with their parents; and 18 percent of blacks reported doing drugs with their parents.
22 percent of teens living in urban areas reported doing drugs with their parents, compared to 17 percent of teens living in the suburbs.
The Phoenix House survey is the latest in a body of research documenting parents' influence on their children's decisions on whether or not to use drugs. 
A Partnership for a Drug-Free America study last year found that an increasing number of parents are talking to their children about the specific risks of illegal drugs, and doing so more thoroughly and more often than in previous years.
That study, of over 6,500 teenagers, concluded that parents' anti-drug messages appear to be having an impact, with teen drug use leveling off or declining and fewer teenagers believing that drug use is "cool." 
By Francie Grace ?
2000, CBS Worldwide Inc., All Rights Reserved.
In her latest Political Points commentary, CBS News Senior Political Editor Dotty Lynch says the Democrats and Republicans are both now looking to co-opt the middle. 
New polls this week suggest that President Bush's numbers are up a bit.
And his political advisors argue that the best way for this to continue is to "talk Democratic." 
On July 8 the Washington Post's Tom Edsall reported that "Republican strategists are warning that the electorate is moving steadily to the left; and that the party needs to adopt new rhetoric and tactics to attract the growing number of working women, Hispanics, secular voters and socially tolerant, well-educated professionals." 
Bush's political advisors say that while he has solidified his base (83 percent of Republicans supported him in the last CBS New /New York Times poll), Independents and Democrats slipped away during the last few months.
Taking back the issue agenda with a discount credit card for prescription drugs for seniors, leaks about policies to overhaul Medicare and Social Security, trying to get a compromise on a Patients Bill of Rights and, of course, keeping up the focus on Hispanics, is the order of the day. 
The last thing the Bushies want is to get bogged down in new culture wars over stem-cell research and faith-based initiatives.
Headlines that the White House was ready to cut a deal with the Salvation Army to allow them skirt workplace rules protecting gays were definitely not in the playbook. 
"If he governed as he campaigned he'd be doing fine," said Sen. Evan Bayh, D-Ind.
"But he's lost the 'com' from compassionate conservative.
He's become a passionate conservative." 
Democrats and Republicans are now engaged in a ritual dance of positioning.
Michael Barone, in the introduction to the Almanac of American Politics 2002, says that that this country is "divided down the middle," 49 percent Republican, 49 percent Democratic in the recent votes for the White House and Congress.
"We haven't had such stasis in successive election results since the 1880s, which was also the last decade when a president was elected despite trailing in the popular vote and the Senate was equally divided." 
Barone also says there are major cultural difference between the two groups, especially in the area of religion. "
One group is observant, tradition-bound and moralistic.
The other is unobservant, liberation-minded, relativistic." 
Both parties are now looking to co-opt the middle the president by embracing some pro-government, traditionally Democratic issues; and centrist Democrats by returning to values and issues like community policing and fatherhood initiatives, and by labeling Bush as a captive of the right wing. 
The Democratic Leadership Council is holding a meeting in Indianapolis, July 15-17, which will include 250 state and local officials who will be "trained in the language of values and ideas" and hear from such national players as Sens.
Joe Leiberman, Hillary Clinton and Tom Daschle.
The DLC says it is concerned about "a cultural problem affecting the Democratic Party" and feels that Gore lost in 2000 because he abandoned the issues of crime and welfare, made some working class people feel the Democrats were hostile to their values, and favored economic redistribution rather than expanded opportunity. 
The other side of their strategy is to try to portray Bush and the Republicans as socially intolerant and captives of the right.
A test of this will come in the New Jersey gubernatorial race where conservative Republican Brett Schundler beat the more moderate Republican Bob Franks and will face DLCer Jim McGreevey in November. 
Schundler, the 42-year-old mayor of heavily Democratic Jersey City, is a darling of the national conservatives and used images of Ronald Reagan in his primary campaign.
Democrats are expected to try to tar him as an extremist, especially on the issues of abortion and gun control, and some Republicans want him to trim his conservative sails for the general election. 
Campaign spokesman Bob Guhl, says Schundler's general election strategy won't change much.
He will continue an "anti-establishment campaign" focusing on the same four issues that won him the primary: lowering property taxes, reforming education, reducing suburban sprawl and removing the tolls from the Garden State Parkway.
Guhl says if he talks about these issues while McGreevey hammers away on abortion and gun control, Schundler will come through as more in touch with the people of New Jersey because he's talking the issues that really matter to them. 
The DLC warns Democrats that they need to frame these social issues in less polarizing ways that won't turn off mainstream voters.
For example, casting abortion as something that should be "safe, legal and rare," rather something that is every woman's right.
Gun control must not imply that gun owners are evil; they suggest using the words "gun safety" rather than "gun control." 
Much of this positioning is rhetoric loaded with boomer jargon.
Reality often has a way of ruining some of the coolest catch phrases.
Despite all of the DLC's efforts, Schundler's rallying cry of ending the tolls on the Garden State Parkway may be more "empowering to the vital center" than fatherhood initiatives and communitarianism. 
In her latest Political Points commentary, CBS News Senior Political Editor Dotty Lynch takes a look at how changes in the Electoral College could affect the next race for the White House. 
It's an axiom that candidates, like generals, who fight the last war will inevitably lose the next one. 
Such would be the case if the "Gore insiders" quoted in this week's U.S. News and World Report are correct.
In an item predicting that Gore will run again in 2004, these cognoscenti say that he will follow the electoral strategy of 2000 with one exception forget Tennessee and pour money into New Hampshire. 
Sounds good, for if little New Hampshire's four electoral votes had gone to Gore, he would have beaten Bush 271-267 and Florida wouldn't have mattered. 
But there's one big problem with this idea, as Harrison Hickman, Gore's pollster last time, points out. 
The 2000 Census has reapportioned the electoral votes in each state, dropping Gore's 2000 base of 267 votes down to 260.
If the states vote the same way in 2004 as they did in 2000, Bush would beat Gore by 278-260, and New Hampshire's four votes won't matter. 
Eight states will gain a total of 12 electoral votes in 2004: Arizona , California , Colorado , Florida , Georgia , Nevada , North Carolina and Texas .
Of these, Gore won only California. 
And ten states will lose those 12 electoral votes: Connecticut , Illinois , Indiana , Michigan , Mississippi , New York , Ohio , Oklahoma , Pennsylvania and Wisconsin .
Gore won six of those states and can now kiss eight of the 12 electoral votes goodbye. 
Of course, all of this presumes that Bush really did win Florida and that he'd win it again in 2004.
But Bush strategists are by no means taking Florida for granted and they know that 2004 will be different from 2000 in another important respect Hispanic voters.
Because this vote is growing so rapidly, the Bushies have targeted it and say they must exceed the 35 percent he won in 2000.
Matthew Dowd, who coordinates polls for the Bush camp out of the Republican Nation Committee, says that if Bush doesn't improve his standing with minorities, he'll lose the election by 3 million votes, and risk losing Arizona and Colorado, as well as Florida. 
None of these analyses ever question the existence of the Electoral College in 2004.
It's a mystery why all these blue-ribbon panels now looking into electoral reform are avoiding the biggest dinosaur of them all a system that is patently undemocratic and could cause more "illegitimacy" than all those hanging and pregnant chads. 
In their excellent book, "Electoral College Primer 2000,"
Lawrence D. Longley and Neil R. Peirce point out the potentially "disastrous failings of the Electoral College in electing the people's President." 
The winner-take-all system distorts the popular vote in a way that is unfair to voters in 44 of the 50 states.
Why should Al Gore have won all the electoral votes in Iowa, Wisconsin, Oregon and New Mexico, or George W. Bush in Florida when they basically tied in the popular vote? 
This time the electoral vote system worked for Bush but it could have easily tipped the other way for Gore.
A week before the election it looked like Bush would win the popular vote but lose the Electoral College.
What convoluted system caused Bush and Gore to virtually ignore the voters in four of the six most populous states California, Texas, New York and Illinois and spend so much time and money in Washington and Wisconsin? 
Despite the lack of campaigning in the big states, the votes of citizens there do count more.
While the extra two votes each state gets helps to marginally increase the clout of the small states, their votes still matter significantly less to the overall outcome.
One statistical analysis shows that in 2000 the vote of each Californian counted 2.663 times more than the vote of each Montanan.
The argument that the Electoral College helps the small states because candidates wouldn't go there otherwise is negated by statistics and by reality.
Candidates campaign in big swing states and ignore safe, small ones. 
For years the political system has disregarded the will of the American voters who believe that their president like their governor, senator and mayor should be the person who wins the most votes. 
That simple idea is the one we peddle to emerging democracies in Eastern Europe and Latin America.
Maybe it's time for the electoral reformers to go beyond new voting machines and take on something that would really make every vote count. 
MMI Viacom Internet Services Inc.
All Rights Reserved.
In his latest Against the Grain commentary, CBSNews.com's Dick Meyer takes a look at the most unpopular tax of all: the so-called death tax. 
The first major <a href="/now/story/0,1597,278532-412,00.shtml" target="external" CBS News/The New York Times poll since President Bush took office has just been completed.
A surprising and fascinating result is that 71 percent of those polled oppose the current estate tax, better known to Republican speechwriters as the death tax. 
It is, as CBS News Survey Analyst Sarah Dutton points out, "the only place in the poll where there was a real consensus."
Partisanship did not affect the results: 74 percent of Republicans object to the estate tax, as do 69 percent of Democrats.
To hammer home the point, 81 percent of those polled also believe there should be no estate tax for those who inherit small businesses, farms and ranches. 
To put this in a broader public opinion context, the poll shows that on matters of tax and fiscal policy, the public agrees on virtually nothing. 
Can you save social security, spend more on education and cut taxes?
No way, according to 43 percent; sure, say 48 percent.
Whose tax plan is fair, Bush's or the Dems?
Bush wins by a decisive margin of 44 percent to 43 percent.
Bush's cuts are fair to all Americans in the estimation of 38 percent of those polled, but they only benefit the rich according to the other 56 percent. 
To put this in a broader, real economic context, remember that fewer than 48,000 taxpayers less than 2 percent of yearly deaths pay any estate taxes.
Half the revenue from the estate tax comes from just 5,000 legacies a year leaving $5 million or more behind.
Only estates over $675,000 are taxed at all. 
Bottom line: few people in our poll will actually have to deal with estate taxes.
It's taxing the "other guy" something people usually approve of wholeheartedly that bugs people. "
Don t tax him, don't tax me, tax that guy behind the tree," runs a popular rhyme with Ways and Means Committee folks.
In this case, the guy behind the tree probably owns the whole forest and the nearby trout pond. 
But quite to the contrary, taxing inheritances is overwhelmingly unpopular.
How come? 
Democratic pollster Harrison Hickman suggested the current opposition to the estate tax is probably based on confusion and skilled political marketing.
Hickman said, "people grossly overestimate" the chances that the estate tax will effect them personally.
And he admits that President Bush "has done a pretty good of selling it."
He thinks the reason congressional Republicans have separated the estate tax repeal from the rest of the income tax package is that the estate tax will be easy to pass on its own later this year. 
Perhaps.
Or maybe it has more to do with the role that leaving some financial legacy for your children and heirs plays in our American concept of "making it," as well as being a good parent.
Perhaps people have a secret fantasy that there's a rich, reclusive dying uncle out there for them.
I don't know. 
I do know that when gazillionaires Warren Buffett and George Soros recently signed a pronouncement in The New York Times entitled, Call to preserve the Estate Tax, my instant gut reaction was to want the damn thing repealed on the spot.
They even have a Web site, www.responsiblewealth.org .
Check it out.
If you have a few hundred million crackers you don't want your kids to have, it s the place for you. 
The Sage of Omaha and his fellow travelers make the usual argument that cutting the estate tax by definition means more of the tax burden is placed on lower incomes.
That's true, but almost trivial since the revenue from the estate tax is so small in the big budget picture. 
They seem more impressed with a kind of econo-moral argument.
Buffet said that allowing inheritances is like "choosing the 2020 Olympic team by picking the eldest sons of the gold medal winners in the 2000 Olympics."
A clever debating point,
but it's hardly a justification for a highly confiscatory tax.
(I mean that in the nicest way, Uncle Warren).
Certainly there's nothing in the law to prevent anyone from giving his or her money away to anyone or any group, even the U.S. Treasury. 
The estate tax is paradoxically all-American and un-American.
Leaving an inheritance is a noble part of the American dream; gaining wealth, position and success through inheritance is not. 
That is exactly why the estate tax has had such a convoluted history in this country.
It was first levied in the 1790s, but repealed after five years.
It was imposed and repealed twice more over the centuries and it may happen again.
Sept. 11 terror attacks suspect Osama bin Laden is the world's most hunted man but he still has thousands of supporters, in both Afghanistan and neighboring Pakistan. 
CBS News Correspondent Allen Pizzey reports from Islamabad, Pakistan. 
U.S. embassy in the Afghan capital Kabul this morning.
Shouting anti-American slogans the protestors tore down the embassy sign. 
The last American diplomat left Kabul in January of 1989. 
A U.S. official here said "a number" of locally employed foreign service staff looked after the offices but it was not clear if any were there when the mob attacked. 
Taliban forces eventually stopped the rampage. 
Across the border in Pakistan, the government is officially backing the United States in the war on terrorism but there are thousands within Pakistan who disagree with that position. 
As U.S. and Pakistani military officials met for two days to discuss the details of a possible military strike on bin Laden's positions in Afghanistan, sources close to the talks say Pakistan is concerned about the visibility of any future American troops presence here. 
Pakistan has reportedly agreed to the pre-positioning of equipment and re-fueling rights but continues to insist that no Pakistani troops will be involved in combat operations. 
The Pakistanis are seeking a United Nations resolution as cover for any operation against Afghanistan and are also insisting that any force does NOT include either Israeli or Indian troops.
Boeing Co. said Thursday that it would move its headquarters to Chicago, ending weeks of speculation fueled by the aerospace giant's decision to leave this city where it was founded in 1916. 
Chicago was chosen over Dallas-Fort Worth and Denver. 
Boeing executives planned a joint appearance with Illinois Gov. George Ryan and Chicago Mayor Richard Daley Thursday afternoon, according to Ryan's office. 
"We looked at three very exciting metropolitan areas in which to base our company," Boeing chairman Phil Condit said.
"It was a very difficult decision." 
The company plans to move Sept. 4 to its new headquarters at 100 North Riverside Plaza, in downtown Chicago. 
The announcement came after Boeing executives boarded their corporate jet at Seattle's Boeing Field on a flight to Chicago. 
"Any of these three cities would have worked - including Seattle if it weren't co-located with our commercial airplane headquarters," said John Warner, the Boeing senior vice president and chief administrative officer who led the company's site selection team. 
Boeing will move a staff of fewer than 500 people, about half the size of its current corporate staff.
The company's new, leaner headquarters are expected to focus on developing global growth opportunities and making the company more cost-efficient. 
Texas Gov. Rick Perry congratulated Chicago on its selection.
"All Texans knew from the outset that the competition with Chicago and Denver would be fierce." 
Analysts said the choice made sense from a geographic standpoint. 
"I think that it's without much question the more convenient location," said Paul Nisbet, an analyst with JSA Research. 
But they also said it would have virtually no impact on how they value the company.
"It's irrelevant to the way I look at the stock," said analyst Byron Callan with Merrill Lynch in New York. 
The three cities had been competing for the aviation giant's new headquarters since March, when Boeing announced plans to move from its home of 85 years to save money and be more central to its operations in 26 states.
Each city offered millions of dollars in tax breaks and other incentives and enlisted the help of sports stars and business leaders to woo the company. 
The company will keep its massive aircraft factories and design and development facilities in the Seattle area. 
Boeing has said the relocation is meant to save money and establish headquarters more centrally located to its operations, spread over 26 states. 
Chicago had been eager to land Boeing, both for the prestige of adding another world-class business along with McDonald's Corp., UAL Corp., Motorola Inc. and Sears Roebuck and Co., and to reverse a recent trend that has seen it lose several corporate headquarters, including Amoco Oil Co. and Montgomery Ward. 
When Boeing executives came to town last month, Chicago officials threw them a dinner party at the Art Institute of Chicago complete with string quartet from the Chicago Symphony Orchestra and a children's choir serenading them with "My Kind of Town." 
The Illinois governor offered $4 million to $5 million in tax incentives to woo the aerospace giant.
Boeing, which is expected to earn about $3 billion this year, also could receive 15 years of state income tax credits, estimated at $25 million to $30 million. 
By Allison Linn
Garrett Wilson and Missy Anastasi didn't exactly have a marriage made in heaven.
Wed in 1986, they lost an infant son the following year. 
Anastasi suspected her husband may have had a hand in the child's death.
But when the medical examiner ruled that the baby had died from Sudden Infant Death Syndrome, she put her suspicions aside and decided to stay with Wilson. 
But the marriage wasn't easy.
With Wilson, a charismatic Harold Hill-type character who sold musical instruments for a living, moving around the country, from one sales job to another, they were apart for months at a time. 
Then in 1993, Anastasi discovered that her husband had secretly filed for divorce.
Wilson later told her that he regretted having divorced her, and wanted to give their relationship a second chance.
A year later, she agreed to join him in Texas, where he had found a high-paying job. 
A few weeks before the move, Anastasi got a call from Vicky Wampler. 
"I wanted to call, and say It s time to move on, " says Wampler, who is Wilson's fourth wife. 
Earlier that year, Wilson had married Wampler, and they had settled into a comfortable life just outside Dallas with their then 10-month-old daughter, Marysa. 
Anastasi was devastated.
It was then she realized that Wilson was capable of anything. 
When Wilson called her to explain his new marriage, she accused him of murdering their son. 
Anastasi went to the police and told them of her suspicions.
Although the case was very cold, she was determined to push it forward.
She spent the next four years, writing hundreds of letters to countless officials, asking for help. 
"If Garrett Wilson had never left Missy, this never would have come forward before, because she had - lock, stock, and barrel - believed in him," says prosecutor Doug Gansler, who led the case against Wilson.
Details of that case are in "While Innocents Slept," a true-crime book by writer Adrian Havill. 
Anastasi even warned Wampler to protect her daughter. 
"He s just not capable of hurting a child," says Wampler, who believes that Anastasi is motivated, not by justice, but by a desire for revenge. 
"This type of relationship had gone on for years.
He moved, and she followed pursuit.
When she realized that he wasn t coming back to her, I think that she became obsessed with his destruction." 
Liz Bahlmann, another woman with whom Wilson had a relationship, agrees. 
"She (Anastasi) would go to the ends of the earth and spend her entire life until she destroys him," says Bahlmann,
She encountered Anastasi in 1985, before Wilson was married to her. 
That summer, Anastasi caught Bahlmann and Wilson on a date at a Delaware beach.
Both women then discovered that Wilson had also been dating the other.
Anastasi was enraged, Bahlmann says, and hit Wilson with her sandals. 
Wilson and Bahlmann left the beach in separate cars.
Bahlmann says Anastasi chased them in her car.
"It was very frightening," she says.
She says that she went off onto the shoulder; Anastasi denies this. 
That day, Wilson told Bahlmann that he had intended to end their relationship and be with Anastasi.
But by the end of the day he had changed his mind. 
A few months later, he proposed to Bahlmann.
But shortly after their wedding invitations went out, Bahlmann discovered that he had already married Anastasi. 
"It was devastating, it was painful," says Bahlmann, who in her last conversation with Wilson told him that she wanted the $3,000 she had lent him.
Wilson paid off the money soon after his son died. 
How did Wilson cast his spell over so many women?
He was charismatic and caring, says Bahlmann: "He treated you like a queen- like you were the only person on earth that mattered.
" murder. 
"Garrett Wilson is a con artist.
he is motivated by greed, and the vehicle to get his greed is women," says Gansler.
"He would certainly prey on a particular type of woman- a needy woman, someone who would be sort of taken in by him." 
America's financial system operated with remarkable efficiency to minimize the fallout from the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan said Tuesday. 
"We are blessed with a financial system that is creative, that is flexible, that is innovative," Greenspan said in remarks to the American Bankers Association. 
The ABA canceled its regular annual convention, which had been scheduled to start Sept. 29 in Palm Desert, Calif., because of the disruptions in air travel.
However, it decided later to proceed with the sessions with the planned speakers making their presentations on the Internet. 
Greenspan said the very fact that he was addressing the bankers in cyberspace was a "testimony to American perseverance, to our technology and to our flexibility.
It is a metaphor for the ability of our economy to circumvent difficulties and innovate around obstacles." 
The Fed chief said such flexibility was also apparent in how banks and Fed officials worked in the days following the attacks to make sure that the financial system would continue operating. 
"Literally within hours of the attack on the World Trade Center, with many of the participants still grieving and with the loss of extraordinary personnel and resources, our financial system was finding ways to return to operation," Greenspan said. 
Greenspan said the destruction of communication lines in the heart of New York's financial district caused disruptions in the normal process of settling billions of dollars of transactions between banks. 
To cover the shortfall, Greenspan noted, the Fed supplied record amounts of cash to the banking system in the days following the attacks, both through direct loans from its discount window and by purchasing Treasury securities for cash that banks could use as reserves to meet withdrawal demands. 
As part of these activities, the Fed provided more than $45 billion to the banking system to keep the government-bond market functioning after it was determined that banks that served as key middlemen in many government bond transactions were having difficulties processing trades. 
The Fed also opened record swap lines to supply credit to foreign commercial banks whose New York operations were having difficulty getting the dollars they needed to complete transactions. 
Greenspan noted that commercial banks also helped get through the crisis by agreeing to extend the length of time for certain settlements.
The terrorist attacks had cut electronic communications between some banks operating in the commercial paper market short-term loans used by corporations to meet funding needs. 
"Crucially, lenders banks in particular stepped up to meet their commitments, real and implied, to avoid the disruptions that were a large part of the terrorists' objective," Greenspan said. 
Greenspan said the success in getting through the crisis without a meltdown of the financial system proved the strength of what he called "our seemingly crazy quilt structure" of financial service companies. 
Legislation passed in 1999 removed Depression-era banking barriers and allowed the creation of new financial "supermarkets" formed by banks, securities firms and insurance companies that could enter each others businesses.
President Islam Karimov granted permission Friday for U.S. warplanes and troops to use an Uzbek air base to support President Bush's campaign to root out terrorists in neighboring Afghanistan.
The U.S. Army dispatched 1,000 infantry soldiers skilled at search-and-rescue, humanitarian missions and helicopter assaults. 
The deal struck by Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld gave the Pentagon a foothold it needs inside Uzbekistan, a former Soviet republic on Afghanistan's northern border.
But it was not clear from Karimov's comments whether it provided the wide latitude U.S. officials had sought for putting a military squeeze on Afghanistan's Taliban. 
Just a month ago before the terror bombings, the U.S. saw Karimov as strong man ruler, known mostly for his brutal suppression of human rights.
Now the U.S. is building a war coalition, and Karimov just made partner. 
What the two countries do share is a common enemy in Osama bin Laden.
Groups linked to bin Laden set numerous terror bombs in Tashkent over several years.
When President Bush called for nations to join this war, the Uzbecks were almost first in line. 
"We have offered one airfield in Uzbekistan, with all the surrounding facilities, in order to deploy a limited number of (U.S.) transport airplanes and helicopters," Karimov said through an interpreter at a news conference with Rumsfeld. 
Karimov quickly added, "In Uzbekistan we are against the use of our territory for land operations against Afghanistan and we are against air strikes from the territory of Uzbekistan." 
"I envisage that the equipment will be used for humanitarian operations and for search and rescue operations," he said. 
Furthermore, the president said, no U.S. special operations forces - such as Army Rangers or Green Berets who specialize in operating behind enemy lines - would be allowed to operate from Uzbek territory. 
"We are not quite ready for this," he said when asked why no special forces could use the base. 
Click here to learn more about the war on terrorism. 
In exchange for cooperation, Karimov said Uzbekistan was seeking security guarantees.
He said a legal document being prepared will spell out each side's commitments. 
Hours before Karimov announced the deal, about 1,000 troops from the Army's 10th Mountain Division, based at Fort Drum, N.Y., flew across the Atlantic en route to Uzbekistan, according to a senior defense official traveling with Rumsfeld.
The official spoke on condition of anonymity and said no details about the exact locations of the troops or their missions would be made public. 
One possibility - convenient for its proximity to Afghanistan - is Kakaydi Air Base, 30 miles north of Termez.
Kakaydi was built by the Soviets in the 1980s and used to launch attacks into Afghanistan. 
The 10th Mountain Division force is the first regular U.S. ground troops acknowledged by the Pentagon to have deployed to Central Asia. 
Earlier, other defense officials had said light infantry from the 10th Mountain would be used in Uzbekistan to provide ground security for U.S. Air Force fighter and combat search-and-rescue teams. 
The troops also would be on standby to come to the aid of any U.S. special operations troops that might encounter major trouble while conducting raids inside Afghanistan. 
The division performed similar missions in 1992 in Somalia and 1994 in Haiti.
In Africa, soldiers secured major cities and roads to provide safe passage for relief supplies to the starving Somali population. 
In Haiti, the division's 1st Brigade arrived by helicopter from an aircraft carrier off the coast, occupied Port-au-Prince International Airport and worked to create an environment in which the government of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide could be re-established. 
Rumsfeld's three-hour stop in Tashkent was the fourth on a five-nation tour which began Wednesday in Saudi Arabia and Oman, two countries where thousands of U.S. forces are stationed. 
Rumsfeld also held talks in Cairo with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak on Thursday and flew to Ankara, Turkey later Friday. 
In Turkey, Rumsfeld met with Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit and the Turkish defense chief Sabahattin Cakmakoglu and thanked the only predominantly Muslim NATO ally for its support. 
Rumsfeld also said the United States is ready to work with various rebel and tribal groups within Afghanistan in the campaign against Osama bin Laden, the No. 1 suspect in the Sept. 11 terror attacks. 
"There are people in the Taliban who do not like the fact that foreigners have come in, the al-Qaida, and have taken over so much of the control" of their nation, Rumsfeld said of bin Laden's network. 
U.S. military aircraft can use Uzbek airspace. 
Uzbekistan is prepared to "upgrade" its intelligence exchanges with the United States.
This is a key point, in Rumsfeld's view, because he believes the Uzbeks have valuable insights into Afghanistan. 
U.S. transport planes and helicopters and personnel involved in search and rescue operations can use one Uzbek airfield. 
The legal document spelling out the deal will be made public.
Launching his company's biggest product in six years, Microsoft chairman Bill Gates on Thursday touted the Windows XP operating system as the harbinger of a new era in more Internet-centric computing. 
Appearing onstage at a Times Square hotel, Gates saluted New Yorkers for their "courage, determination and resilience" and predicted the tech industry, in its worst slump ever, would once again "re-energize" the U.S. economy.
With him was Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, who Gates said persuaded him to hold the announcement in New York despite the terror attacks. 
"Today it really is actually the end of the MS-DOS era," Gates told the audience of about 1,500, a reference to Microsoft's original operating system, the underpinning of all the company's consumer-oriented Windows products until XP. 
But Gates' software has been out there unofficially, for a couple of weeks, as part of computers sold by Dell, Compaq, Gateway and others. 
CBS News Computer Consultant
Larry Magid says XP is "not as buggy as Windows 98 or Windows Millennium" and is "very good" at handling MP-3 music files, digital photos and CDs. 
"If your machine is more than two or three years old," cautions Magid, "it's probably not going to be able to run XP." 
He also advises checking to make sure that XP supports all your hardware and software. 
Those aren't the concerns that are uppermost at the Justice Department and among Microsoft competitors. 
As Microsoft's software and Internet services become more pervasive, critics say so does the potential for breaches in information security. 
To Gates, also Microsoft's chief software architect, it's simply about saving computer users time and money. 
"It's a value for consumers," Gates said.
"Why are there headlights in cars?
Why don't they make you go and buy those things separately?" 
It's also about money: Desktop operating systems accounted for more than $8 billion of the $25.3 billion in revenue Microsoft reported for fiscal year 2001. 
Friends and foes agree that Windows XP is the souped-up sedan of the desktop operating system world. 
It offers new features for listening to music, playing videos, or editing and organizing digital photographs.
A new system called Windows Messenger lets users communicate instantly with others using text, voice and video. 
Gates' no-holds-barred vision has built the company into a multi-billion-dollar enterprise and made him the richest man in the world. 
He believes his company's products have driven the technology revolution, part of why Microsoft has refused to curtail its aggressive efforts to expand Windows despite legal threats from the federal government and attorneys general of 18 states and the District of Columbia, who sued Microsoft for violating antitrust laws. 
"We work extremely hard and we put out a new version of Windows every couple years as best we can, and no legal thing has prevented us from doing that, and I don't expect that it will," said Gates, who turns 46 on Sunday. 
Although the company has been found guilty of breaking antitrust laws and is currently negotiating a penalty in federal court, Microsoft has refused to put Windows XP on the bargaining table. 
In fact, Microsoft has only expanded its reach.
A new feature in Windows XP called Passport seeks to become the standard online authentication system, storing Web site passwords, credit card numbers and other personal information required to complete Internet transactions. 
Critics say that by requiring Passport sign-up in order to use such features as Windows Messenger, Microsoft is coercing people into giving the company personal information.
And they worry about the security risk if Microsoft holds personal information on millions of Internet users. 
Gates dismisses those concerns, though Microsoft has suffered serious security breaches in which hackers gained access to the company's internal network - and may have even obtained valuable source code. 
Gates calls Passport a savior, not a threat, to Internet commerce. 
"We're trying to make the Internet more effective and allow not just large companies to get to critical mass with these user names and passwords, but let any company who wants to participate in Passport just do it," he said. 
Meanwhile, Microsoft forges ahead with the next version of Windows, working with a $5 billion annual research and development budget.
The company won't say when to expect the next upgrade.
Americans are increasingly pessimistic about the direction of the nation's economy, according to a CBS News poll.
Nearly half the public now thinks the faltering U.S economy is getting worse the most negative view of where things are headed since 1992. 
Disapproval of President Bush's handling of the economy has also risen, while his overall approval rating has dropped to a new low.
In addition, Mr. Bush faces public opposition to several of his priorities including his energy plan and increased military spending. 
As the president and Congress get back to work after summer vacation, they face a new set of budget problems, brought about by a lower-than-expected surplus and increasing concern about the state of the economy.
Americans overwhelmingly reject one solution to the budget dilemma: tapping into the Social Security surplus to pay for domestic or military programs. 
While most Americans don't see the Bush tax cut as the primary culprit behind the shrinking budget surplus, the White House is not viewed as a credible authority on the actual state of the federal budget.
And more Americans say it's the Democrats in Congress, not President Bush, who are more likely to make the right decisions about that budget, the economy and government spending. 
The public's perception of the nation's economy has changed dramatically since the start of the year, reaching lows not seen since early 1996.
Although 56 percent still think the economy is in good shape, 44 percent think it's in bad condition.
Just before Mr. Bush took office in January, perceptions of the economy were overwhelmingly positive, with 84 percent saying it was in good shape. 
There is an even bleaker assessment of where the economy is heading.
Nearly half, 48 percent think it is getting worse, 42 percent think it is staying the same and only 8 percent think the economy is getting better.
Those are the lowest numbers since 1992. 
However, fewer than half the public, 44 percent, think the U.S. is currently in a recession; 50 percent do not think this is the case.
Nevertheless, the economy has now become the number one problem Americans want the president and Congress to do something about, cited by 13 percent.
Last June, the economy came in third, behind education and the energy/gas problem.
During last year's presidential campaign, it was hardly mentioned. 
The increasingly pessimistic views of the economy have affected the way Americans perceive the government's current budget situation; most believe the recent lower surplus estimates are the result of economic conditions, and not the administration's tax cut.
Fifty-five percent think that the lower budget surplus is due to the economic slowdown, while 28 percent attribute it to Mr. Bush's tax cut.
However, most of those who do blame the tax cut don't think it was worth the smaller surplus. 
The White House and the Congressional Budget Office continue to disagree about the exact amount of the government surplus, or lack thereof, and the public doubts the Bush administration's credibility on this issue.
By 53 percent to 26 percent, Americans believe the Congressional Budget Office figures and not those issued by the White House. 
One troubling note is that on this issue the White House is not believed by many of its own party members.
Although more Republicans find the White House figures credible, 38 percent trust the Congressional Budget Office estimates.
Only 44 percent of Republicans believe the White House. 
Many Americans actually believe the situation is even worse than the Congressional estimates, with an increasing number thinking the government currently takes in less in revenues than it spends.
Now, 39 percent believe the government is in a surplus situation, but just about as many - 38 percent - think it is in deficit.
Just six months ago, by nearly two to one the public believed the government was running at a surplus. 
There is no consensus in principle on whether a smaller surplus is good or bad; 45 percent think it's good, and 40 percent think it's bad.
But, most do believe the smaller surplus will lead to cutbacks in government spending, and despite Republicans' arguments in favor of smaller government, most Americans disagree.
Fifty-one percent think lower spending on domestic programs would be bad and 39 percent think it would be a good thing. 
Most see lower spending as inevitable: 54 percent expect that the smaller budget surplus will lead to a decrease in what the government spends on domestic programs, while 36 percent think that won't happen. 
There is consensus when it comes to Social Security: Americans are adamant that surplus Social Security funds be off-limits to the government.
More than seven in ten say it is not acceptable for the government to use part of that surplus to pay for things like the military or prescription drug coverage; only 23 percent think this would be acceptable. 
Those age 65 and over are especially vehement on this issue.
Eighty percent of seniors say it is not acceptable to touch the Social Security surplus, and 8 percent say it is. 
President Bush has said he would use the Social Security surplus only in the case of war or a recession, but most Americans don't even consider recession is an adequate reason to raid Social Security.
Sixty-six percent say the government should not touch this money, even if the economy is in a recession, while 26 percent say that would be acceptable. 
THE SHRINKING SURPLUS:
WHO'S TO BLAME? 
As Republicans, Democrats and the White House all blame each other for the smaller surplus, 17 percent of Americans blame the president himself and slightly larger percentages blame one or the other Congressional party.
Twelve percent of the public blames all three. 
More blame one of the two parties in Congress than blame the president, but Republicans (Mr. Bush and those in Congress) are more often named than the Congressional Democrats alone. 
But the Democrats are seen as more able to find a solution.
Forty-four percent think the Democrats are more likely to make the right decisions about balancing the federal budget, and 35 percent think George W. Bush is. 
With concerns about a declining economy, a smaller budget surplus and the threat of dipping into the Social Security surplus, Americans' approval of the way George W. Bush is handling his job as president has declined: 50 percent now approve, the lowest rating since he assumed office; 38 percent disapprove. 
News of the Congressional Budget Office's projections that some of the Social Security surplus will be needed to pay for other government spending may be costing Bush the support of a key demographic group - seniors.
Americans over age 65 are now split in their assessment of the job Mr. Bush is doing as president - 45 percent approve and 43 percent disapprove.
In April, six in ten seniors approved of the job the president was doing. 
In 1981, Social Security also cost President Ronald Reagan some support among older Americans.
Reagan's job rating among seniors dropped significantly when he proposed cutting some Social Security benefits in order to keep the system solvent. 
Concerns about the economy are clearly affecting public assessments of Mr. Bush's performance on that issue:
45 percent now disapprove of the way he is handling the economy and 43 percent approve.
In June, half of the public approved of the way Mr. Bush was handling the economy and 38 percent disapproved. 
But other summer news may have helped assessments of Mr. Bush in other areas.
His approval rating on foreign policy is now 49 percent, nearly unchanged from his rating in June when he returned from his first trip to Europe as president.
His rating on the environment has gone up: 43 percent of Americans now approve of the way he is handling the environment and 40 percent disapprove.
Two months ago, the public disapproved of Mr. Bush's handling of the environment, 46 percent to 39 percent. 
But the most striking improvement is on the energy situation.
In June, threats of power blackouts and astronomical gasoline prices kept the president's approval rating on handling energy down at 33 percent.
Now, with those predictions unmet, the public views the president more positively on this issue: 43 percent of Americans approve of the job he is doing, while 42 percent disapprove. 
The public's overall opinions of Mr. Bush are similar to what they were in June: 40 percent of Americans now have a favorable opinion of the president, while 29 percent view him unfavorably.
But one perception that doesn't do much to enhance the president's image is the view that he is out of touch with what average people think.
One half - 52 percent - say Mr. Bush is out of touch with what average people think, while 43 percent believe he is in touch. 
Among those groups who feel strongly that Bush is out of touch with average Americans are the poor, blacks, Democrats and Liberals.
Even a majority 56 percent - of independents says the president is out touch with what average people think. 
With a slumping economy and a disappearing surplus, Americans are being circumspect about government spending, and they are divided as to whether the country can afford the Bush tax cut and increased spending on the military and preserve Social Security.
46 percent think this is possible and 46 percent think it is not. 
The overwhelming support for protecting the Social Security fund may have caused public willingness to sacrifice spending on some other proposals.
Given the choice between increasing military spending by $18 billion, as Mr. Bush wants to do, or spending on domestic programs, most Americans choose domestic programs as their top priority.
Fifty-four percent think the priority should be to spend on domestic programs, while 35 percent prefer increasing military spending. 
Twenty-eight percent would like to see military spending increased, as Mr. Bush has proposed, but 53 percent want spending kept steady and 14 percent want it decreased.
During the campaign last year, nearly half of registered voters favored increased defense spending. 
MISSILE DEFENSE? 
While President Bush's proposed missile defense shield gets support in general, once a price is mentioned, there is no longer a consensus.
Fifty-eight percent of the public supports it when the cost of the plan is not mentioned, and 32 percent oppose it.
But when told that the cost could reach $100 billion, the figure put forth by the Bush administration itself, support drops to 47 percent; 46 percent then oppose it. 
In addition to the expense involved, increasingly Americans are skeptical that the shield will work.
In this poll, 50 percent think it will work and 34 percent think it won't.
That is a 16-point drop since last March, when 66 percent thought it would work and 20 percent thought it wouldn't. 
Another area of public concern is President Bush's energy bill, which would provide tax breaks for energy development, incentives for conservation, and drilling in part of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.
It was passed by the House in early August and will now go before the Senate.
But just a third of Americans approve of it; 59 percent disapprove. 
While most Americans don't yet know much about the bill, knowledge of the bill's content has little impact on the ratio of support and opposition. 
The public continues to think President Bush takes a stance in his energy policies that is very different from their own.
Fifty-nine percent of Americans think protecting the environment is more important than producing energy; nearly seven in ten, however, think President Bush would choose producing energy over protecting the environment. 
The Bush administration's ties to the oil industry are also problematic: 66 percent of the public thinks the oil industry has too much influence on the administration's energy policies. 
Americans overwhelmingly believe that conservation, not production, should be the higher priority for government.
Two-thirds of Americans say encouraging energy conservation should be the higher priority for the government, and only 19 percent the priority should be increasing the production of petroleum, coal, and natural gas.
Among those who say conservation should be the priority, 70 percent disapprove of President Bush's energy bill. 
By nearly two to one, Americans say they like Social Security the old-fashioned way - a safety net that is controlled by the government and that must pay benefits to everyone.
One-third, on the other hand, think Social Security should be controlled by individuals, who would be responsible for investing their contributions as well as taking the risk of losing or making money. 
Support for keeping Social Security a government-controlled safety net is shared by people of all ages, though it is strongest among older Americans.
About three-quarters of seniors over age 65 say Social Security should by controlled by the government and pay benefits to everyone. 
Still, at least in principle, 52 percent of the public thinks it could be a good idea to partially privatize Social Security by allowing individuals to invest portions of the Social Security taxes on their own; 43 percent think it's a bad idea. 
However, most Americans say they would not take advantage of this option.
Forty-two percent say they would be very or somewhat likely to invest some of their Social Security taxes in the stock market, and 56 percent say they would not be likely to take the risk.
A small majority of those under 45 years old say they would be likely to invest their Social Security taxes in the market; as would two-thirds who favor privatizing Social Security. 
In any event, Americans say that once individuals invest their Social Security taxes, it is the individuals' responsibility should they suffer losses in the stock market. 
On this issue, Democrats have a clear advantage: 48 percent think the Democrats in Congress are more likely to make the right decisions about Social Security; 33 percent say President Bush will.
That spread is twice as large as the 7-point advantage Al Gore held on the issue during the presidential campaign last fall. 
ARE
PARTISAN BATTLES
LOOMING? 
This fall, the Congress will be debating and voting on a number of bills that represent key elements of Mr. Bush's agenda as well as making key decisions about the budget.
The public is slightly more skeptical that the president and Democrats in Congress will work together than they were earlier this summer, and they give the Democrats an edge in several areas. 
Although majorities believe that Mr. Bush will compromise with the Democrats and that the Democrats will work with the administration, these numbers are down from June. 
Fifty-eight percent of Americans now believe President Bush will work with the Democrats in Congress in order to get things done, down from 63 percent two months ago; 59 percent say the Democrats will work with the president, also down from 67 percent in June. 
The public, however, strongly believes that Mr. Bush and the Democrats SHOULD compromise.
Nearly three-quarters of Americans say Mr. Bush and the Democrats should compromise in order to get things done, while only 17 percent believe they should each stick to their positions. 
44 percent say Democrats are more likely to make the right decisions about balancing the federal budget, whereas 35 percent say Mr. Bush is more likely.
This is a change from previous polls, where Republicans usually have an advantage. 
On Social Security, traditionally a Democratic issue, 48 percent to 33 percent feel the Democrats are likely to do a better job than the president. 
When it comes to the economy, the top concern of Americans, 43 percent say the Democrats are more likely to keep the economy strong, while 37 percent say Mr. Bush will do a better job. 
And despite the passage of Mr. Bush's tax cut and distribution of tax rebates, Americans say the Democrats, by a margin of 43 percent to 38 percent, are more likely to make the right decisions when it comes to how the government should spend taxpayer's money. 
More people have a favorable view of the Democratic Party than have a favorable view of the Republicans, but the gap has narrowed slightly since June.
Fifty-three percent have a favorable view of the Democrats, while 46 percent view the Republicans favorably.
In June, 56 percent viewed the Democrats favorably and 46 percent had a favorable view of the Republicans. 
Opinions of Congress as a whole remain mixed: 43 percent approve of the way Congress is handling its job, about the same percentage as a month ago, while 41 percent disapprove. 
Vice President Dick Cheney continues to get good marks from the public: 53 percent of the public approves of the job he is doing as vice president and only 25 percent disapprove.
Cheney's approval rating is down only slightly since May when 56 percent approved of his job performance and 17 percent disapproved. 
Al Gore's recent re-emergence into public life, co-sponsoring a political workshop at Vanderbilt University, has not had much positive impact on the American people.
In fact, 20 percent fewer express any opinion about the former Democratic nominee than did so in January. 
Currently, 31 percent of Americans have a favorable view of the former vice president, down from 44 percent in January; 33 percent view him unfavorably, also down from the start of this year. 
This poll was conducted among a nationwide sample of 850 adults, interviewed by telephone August 28-31, 2001.
The error due to sampling could be plus or minus three percentage points on results based on the entire sample.
Sampling error for subgroups may be higher. 
For detailed information on how CBS News conducts public opinion surveys, click here.
Divers on Friday resumed the operation to raise the Russian Kursk nuclear submarine from the floor of the Barents Sea after a halt caused by storms in the area, officials said. 
The 18,000-ton vessel, which sank during naval exercises Aug. 12 last year, killing the entire 118-man crew, is to be brought to the surface Sept. 15 by steel cables connected to 26 computer-controlled hydraulic lifting devices, anchored to a giant barge. 
Divers went down to the sunken Kursk Friday evening as weather conditions in the area resumed, and were working in the area of the submarine's 3rd and 4th section, said Navy spokesman Igor Dygalo. 
On Thursday, winds of up to 72 kph (45 mph) and high waves rocked the Norwegian diving support ship Mayo, which serves as a base for the salvage operation, and Vice Adm. Mikhail Motsak decided to suspend work until the situation was calmer. 
The harsh weather in the region north of the arctic port of Murmansk was one of many risks that critics cited in opposing the costly lifting operation. 
An international team of divers has so far made 16 of 26 holes in the Kursk's double hull.
Once that is completed, they will prepare to sever the submarine's mangled fore section, which is to be left behind when the Kursk is lifted for fear it could contain unexploded torpedoes. 
After the Kursk's bow is sawed off, the divers will attach steel cables.
Towing the submarine to harbor is expected to take up to two weeks, depending on the weather. 
Russian officials, who hope a close look at the submarine will shed light on the cause of the disaster and comfort family members of the victims, said they planned to complete the operation on schedule despite the weather hazards. 
The deadline for the operation will not change, Ilya Klebanov, a deputy prime minister, was quoted as saying by the Russian news agency Interfax. 
President of the Dutch company Mammoet, which is preparing to lift the Kursk with another Dutch firm, Smit International, under a contract with the Russian government, said 16 Russian divers work on the Mayo ship and top priority will be given to security measures, according to ITAR-Tass. 
Seumeren said the giant barge will sail out from Rotterdam on Aug. 27-28 to the place of the Kursk disaster with equipment to raise the submarine and the Carrier vessel with a unit to cut the first section of the Kursk was ready to leave the Norwegian port of Kirkenes as soon as weather permits. 
Russian officials also have said the sub's two nuclear reactors have been safely shut down and have not leaked any radiation, but that the vessel should be lifted to avoid any potential danger to the area's rich fishing grounds. 
The Atomic Energy Ministry says the main contamination threat in Russia is from decommissioned nuclear submarines that have not been properly disposed because of a lack of funds. 
Viktor Akhunov, head of the ministry's ecological and decommissioning department, told ITAR-Tass that 189 nuclear submarines have been decommissioned as of the beginning of this year and 104 of them still have nuclear fuel onboard.
Washington Post:
Already Shaky Postal Finances Now Shakier Lower Mail Volume, Higher Security Costs Among The Problems
Will A Congressional Bailout Be Needed? 
The U.S. Postal Service is taking a severe financial hit from the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks and the continuing anthrax scare, with declining mail use and rising costs threatening its financial viability, the Washington Post reports. 
Mail volume was down 5 percent in September from the year-ago month.
Revenue in the first three weeks after the attacks was as much as $500 million below projections.
Costs associated with damage to a post office near the World Trade Center are at $63 million and climbing. 
Postal Service officials express faith that the institution will recover, according to The Post, but others say the government-created monopoly is spending money it can ill-afford to part with to increase security, combat the anthrax threat and ensure safe and timely mail delivery.
How much the fear of anthrax-tainted mail will lead to further declines in volume is anybody's guess, the Post says. 
"It's unprecedented," Postal Rate Commission analyst Robert Cohen is quoted as saying.
"This was a direct attack using the mail as a weapon.
It is making everybody rethink the role of the Postal Service.
The rate payer will wind up paying a lot more money for this.
What's likely to happen is the debt will keep growing and growing, and, ultimately, it could be up to Congress to bail them out." 
The Post paints a grim picture of postal fiscal health: Even before Sept. 11
, the Postal Service was expecting a $1.65 billion deficit for fiscal 2001.
It had announced it would seek its third rate hike in less than a year.
It had cut 21,000 positions.
It was $11 billion in debt, fast approaching the $15 billion ceiling set by Congress.
It froze most capital projects.
Its premier product, Priority Mail, was declining after years of exponential growth. 
Postmaster General John Potter acknowledged costs will rise as a result of the additional security needs, but, "Money is not the object," he told the Post. "
The object is to make sure people are safe and the mail is moving." 
Though Potter said volume appears to be returning, the trend for the past two years has shown a net decrease in first-class, single-piece mail -- the class of mail that pays much of the freight for the Postal Service. 
With the Federal Aviation Administration grounding planes for two days and then imposing restrictions on mail that can travel on commercial jets -- only first-class mail under 16 ounces -- the Postal Service has accelerated an effort to carry more mail by truck.
That will slow delivery to some extent, and some fear it will lead to reduced reliance on mail. 
Already, at least one newspaper -- the Arizona Daily Star -- has told readers it will no longer accept "snail mail" addressed to Letters to the Editor, its Caliente entertainment guide and its Community Calendar, the three features that generate the most mail to the newsroom.
Instead, readers were asked to use e-mail, fax or the online calendar. 
Military Postal Service Agency officials have recommended the cancellation of the popular "Operation Dear Abby" that encourages the advice columnist's readers to write holiday greetings to service members overseas. 
Postal clerks and letter carriers across the country are nervous, union leaders say.
They are trying to strike a balance between protecting themselves -- using latex gloves -- and reassuring the public.
Then Thursday, news broke that a letter carrier in New Jersey had developed cutaneous anthrax; a second case was reported Friday. 
"It's bad, and it's going to be worse," said Gene Del Polito, president of the Association for Postal Commerce, a trade group of heavy mail users.
"Certain catalogue sales are down by 20 to 25 percent, and there's general anxiety about the anthrax threat.
Between the two of them and the continuing downturn in the economy, it will press the Postal Service's resources to their absolute limit." 
Just as President Bush has tried to restore the airline industry by exhorting Americans to "get on board," Potter is scrambling to reassure nervous Americans that sending and receiving mail is still a good bet, the Post says.
He has been on television outlining security precautions people should take and stressing the fact that the incidents are isolated -- only a handful of letters out of 680 million pieces a day have contained anthrax. 
"The American public is obviously going to vote with their responses," Potter said in an interview, referring to whether people will continue to send mail.
"That's why I'm out here, sending a message that people should have confidence that their mail is safe if they take the right action." 
The Direct Marketing Association, whose members use the mail to sell $528 billion worth of goods and services a year, is also trying to reassure the public.
It sent guidelines to member clients, such as IBM, Amazon.com and Publishers Clearinghouse, to put a company logo on the envelope and to print a clear and identifiable return address. 
"We don't see any reason for businesses to discontinue the mail campaigns they have in the works because we're seeing the mail continue to move and we are convinced that there is little danger to commercial mail," DMA President H. Robert Wientzen told the Post.
"This is a huge segment of the economy that needs to go forward." 
Wientzen, who also represents credit card companies, notes that there has been a movement toward electronic bill-paying.
But, he said, he does not think the crisis will accelerate the trend. 
If this crisis has a silver lining, it is that it is fixing a spotlight on the fiscal distress of an entity -- the only one that can reach every home in America -- that until now most people took for granted.
Tragedy may beget good if national attention focuses on the Postal Service, said David Fineman, a member of the Postal Service's board of governors. 
"This is a clear indication as to why there is a necessity to have some sort of reform legislation," he said.
"What it shows is from a business standpoint -- forget the actual incident itself -- is that the Postal Service is unable to react in almost any way to make business decisions that a normal business could make." 
The problem, according to The Post, lies with the service's odd structure, created when Congress reorganized it in 1970 as an entity financed by people who send mail, not tax revenue.
It is mandated to break even over time, the Post explains, but must argue its rate-raising case before the Postal Rate Commission, a process that often takes more than a year.
Critics have long decried its slow pace in preparing rate cases, its inability to shed costs and its poor management.
The General Accounting Office has it on its high-risk list of government agencies. 
A bill that would, for the first time in 30 years, overhaul the Postal Service has been drafted by Rep. John M. McHugh, a New York Republican.
He has for six years championed similar legislation, but this year, even the skeptics say, he stands a fighting chance of success.
It is a complex package of measures, chief among them is flexibility in setting rates to raise revenue.
But in so doing, the Postal Service revenue growth rate would be capped at the rate of inflation. 
But mailer advocates such as Del Polito say the crisis has scrambled the terms of debate. "
The arguments had been more in the line of let's deregulate, increase competition," said Del Polito, who ordinarily would advocate "corporatization," a precursor to privatization.
"But in this kind of environment, how many people are you willing to see stick their hand in your mailbox?" 
In fact, he said, the tendency is toward greater government action to ensure safety.
Already, the U.S. Postal Inspection Service has reassigned most of its 1,900 inspectors to postal facilities to be on an anthrax watch. 
In the meantime, the Postal Service, which operates on annual revenue of $70 billion, is seeking $5.3 billion more in rate hikes, including raising the price of a first-class stamp to 37 cents.
It pegged its request to a June economic forecast that is now obsolete, analyst Cohen points out to The Post. 
The Postal Service will let Congress and the administration know what its costs are, Potter said.
But "I'm not going to look to take advantage of the situation," he said.
"If anything, I hope it brings to people's mind the value of the mail, how we're a vital cog in the economy." 
He said it will be about two months before the attacks' financial impact is known. "
The key here," he said, "is the confidence of the American public in the mail."
NASA may ask Russia for monetary compensation for disruptions at the International Space Station caused by space tourist Dennis Tito.
Russian officials dispute the idea that there is a problem. 
NASA administrator Daniel Goldin told a House subcommittee Wednesday that Dennis Tito, the California tycoon who ignored the agency's recommendations and paid the Russians for the opportunity to go into space, has caused anxiety among space workers who overseeing the mission's safety. 
"The current situation has put an incredible stress on the men and women of NASA," Goldin said.
"Mr. Tito does not realize the efforts of thousands of people, United States and Russian, who are working to protect his safety and the safety of everyone else." 
NASA and other partners in the space station objected to Tito's space flight, claiming that the Californian was not properly trained and that the station was not ready for amateur space trippers. 
Russian officials have denied the allegations, saying Tito was spending his time making videos and staying out of the way. 
"Tito's presence, according to our information, has in no way harmed the work of either the permanent or visiting crew," said Viktor Blagov, deputy head of Russia's mission control.
"Everyone is getting on with their work and there have been no complaints from on board." 
The U.S. space agency objected to Russia's selling tourist trips to the station without the agreement of the other space station partners.
An agreement was reached, but Goldin said it may be costly for the Russians. 
"In our agreement that we worked out with the Russians we will do an assessment and get a reimbursement," he said. 
Blagov said Thursday that NASA has yet to ask Russia to pay for any extra costs connected with Tito.
He also said that Moscow would continue to send tourists into orbit if the money can help support the country's space program. 
In a speech Tuesday, retired senator and astronaut John Glenn said the time is not right for space tourism.
Glenn said he did not favor Tito visiting the space station because he believes only researchers should go into space. "
The time for space tourism should still be off in the future," he said. 
"It goes well beyond anything that I have ever dreamed," Tito said on Tuesday.
"Living in space is like having a different life, living in a different world." 
"It is so spectacular, it is so rewarding," he said.
"I think that professional astronauts maybe, circulating among themselves, take this for granted.
But I will tell you, there is nothing like this as an experience." 
He said he hopes the first space tourist won't be the last. 
"Unfortunately, it's very expensive at this point, but there are others who can afford it and I would like to encourage it," Tito said. 
He was given a tour of the American segment of the 16-nation station within an hour of his arrival and "everyone has been fantastic," Tito said. 
"(American astronauts)
Jim Voss and Susan Helms have just gone out of their way to show me around, give me some safety drills," he added. 
Tito initially signed an agreement with a company seeking private sources of money to keep Russia's Mir space station in orbit, but his destination was switched to the ISS when Russia ditched Mir earlier this year. 
Tito spent six days aboard the space station, most of it aboard the Russian-made Zvezda module, before returning to Earth Sunday.
He does not expect to go back into space. 
"It's time for me to help other people achieve their dreams," he said, without elaborating.
NASA may ask Russia for monetary compensation for disruptions at the International Space Station caused by space tourist Dennis Tito.
Russian officials dispute the idea that there is a problem. 
NASA administrator Daniel Goldin told a House subcommittee Wednesday that Dennis Tito, the California tycoon who ignored the agency's recommendations and paid the Russians for the opportunity to go into space, has caused anxiety among space workers who overseeing the mission's safety. 
"The current situation has put an incredible stress on the men and women of NASA," Goldin said.
"Mr. Tito does not realize the efforts of thousands of people, United States and Russian, who are working to protect his safety and the safety of everyone else." 
NASA and other partners in the space station objected to Tito's space flight, claiming that the Californian was not properly trained and that the station was not ready for amateur space trippers. 
Russian officials have denied the allegations, saying Tito was spending his time making videos and staying out of the way. 
"Tito's presence, according to our information, has in no way harmed the work of either the permanent or visiting crew," said Viktor Blagov, deputy head of Russia's mission control.
"Everyone is getting on with their work and there have been no complaints from on board." 
The U.S. space agency objected to Russia's selling tourist trips to the station without the agreement of the other space station partners.
An agreement was reached, but Goldin said it may be costly for the Russians. 
"In our agreement that we worked out with the Russians we will do an assessment and get a reimbursement," he said. 
Blagov said Thursday that NASA has yet to ask Russia to pay for any extra costs connected with Tito.
He also said that Moscow would continue to send tourists into orbit if the money can help support the country's space program. 
In a speech Tuesday, retired senator and astronaut John Glenn said the time is not right for space tourism.
Glenn said he did not favor Tito visiting the space station because he believes only researchers should go into space. "
The time for space tourism should still be off in the future," he said. 
"It goes well beyond anything that I have ever dreamed," Tito said on Tuesday.
"Living in space is like having a different life, living in a different world." 
"It is so spectacular, it is so rewarding," he said.
"I think that professional astronauts maybe, circulating among themselves, take this for granted.
But I will tell you, there is nothing like this as an experience." 
He said he hopes the first space tourist won't be the last. 
"Unfortunately, it's very expensive at this point, but there are others who can afford it and I would like to encourage it," Tito said. 
He was given a tour of the American segment of the 16-nation station within an hour of his arrival and "everyone has been fantastic," Tito said. 
"(American astronauts)
Jim Voss and Susan Helms have just gone out of their way to show me around, give me some safety drills," he added. 
Tito initially signed an agreement with a company seeking private sources of money to keep Russia's Mir space station in orbit, but his destination was switched to the ISS when Russia ditched Mir earlier this year. 
Tito spent six days aboard the space station, most of it aboard the Russian-made Zvezda module, before returning to Earth Sunday.
He does not expect to go back into space. 
"It's time for me to help other people achieve their dreams," he said, without elaborating.
In her latest Political Points commentary, CBS News Senior Political Editor Dotty Lynch assesses the impact of the Sept. 11 terror attacks on off-year elections.
On Thursday night, Vice President Dick Cheney came out of his cave to substitute for President Bush at a Washington fundraiser sponsored by the Republican Governors' Association. 
The RGA event was put on the books to give a big boost to Republican campaigns for governor this year, and Mr. Bush was expected to give a stem-winder of a political speech.
Instead, it was Cheney who spoke, and his words were of al-Qaida cells, anthrax and terrorism - not education, energy and Republican politics. 
On November 6, there are elections for governor in two states, New Jersey and Virginia, and for mayor in hundreds of cities including New York.
Most candidates were all set with their post-Labor Day game plans until terror struck and turned the political world upside down.
Or did it? 
Interviews with Democratic and Republican strategists involved with these campaigns say that while September 11 has had an impact, most of the issues already on the table on September 10 are the issues dominating the close of the campaigns. 
The exception, of course, is New York City, where Republican Michael Bloomberg is running a mega-million dollar TV campaign on his ability to rebuild the city.
But even in New York, basic issues of jobs, the economy and crime are still in play.
Throughout the country, economic anxiety has increased markedly in the past two month and public safety and security have taken on new meaning. 
All of the campaigns pulled their paid ads in the immediate aftermath of the attacks.
Mark Earley, the Republican candidate from Virginia was the first back on the air a week later, and both he and Democratic challenger Mark Warner did perfunctory ads alluding to September 11.
But soon afterwards they went back to their original game plans. 
In New Jersey, Republican Brett Schundler resumed his ad campaign with a spot featuring Mr. Bush with rescue workers including firefighters and policemen.
The ad backfired, however, when New Jersey firefighters (who just happened to have endorsed Democrat Jim McGreevey) blasted Schundler for exploiting the tragedy. 
Schundler, who had already gotten into hot water for calling the press and blasting the Republican governor's handling of the emergency, pulled the ad.
Advisers for his campaign admit frankly that Schundler has been struggling to get people to pay attention with to his campaign. 
One adviser said: He's been hit with a double whammy, first September 11 and now the Yankees.
New Jersey has virtually no statewide television of its own and more than half the state relies on New York media.
Over 700 New Jersey residents were killed in the WTC catastrophe and the personal toll on the state has been tremendous. 
Schundler has also had financial troubles emanating in part from his squabbling with his own state party.
As a result, he hasn t been able to do the heavy media which might have enabled him to refocus attention on him and his campaign.
As of September 30, McGreevey and the New Jersey Democratic Party had out-raised the Republicans $21million to $9 million. 
In Virginia, consultants say voters aren t quite so diverted and the candidates both say that the issues they started with are the ones which are still working for them.
Warner's campaign has found that voters believe that the way to make Virginia strong is to invest in education and vocational training rather than in activities related to terrorism. 
Strategists for both campaigns have pointed to the increase in economic anxiety and both campaigns have messages geared toward this.
Earley's campaign is stressing tax cuts as the best way to stimulate the economy.
Democratic pollster Geoff Garin says however, that in light of the increased belief in the role of government post September 11, the tax issue rings hollow.
The Warner campaign believes that his plan to clean up the budget mess in Richmond and get the Virginia economy moving again are trumping the tax issue. 
Mr. Bush, whose ratings are sky high, has been deliberately low-profile in these races.
As a result, Republican candidates are not expecting much benefit from his coattails.
In Virginia there are brochures and mailings featuring pictures taken prior to September 11 of Earley with Mr. Bush, but they plan no TV ads featuring the president.
The Warner campaign says that its polling showed than an endorsement by the police and firefighters was more important to voters than one by the president, and Warner has been using them heavily in his TV ads. 
All the campaigns have used heavy patriotic symbols, but most say subtle references to September 11 are more appropriate than overt ones.
Anne Kincaid, strategist for Mark Earley says that ads stressing Earley s experience and calm, comforting demeanor, couched as qualities needed now more than ever conveys the message clearly. 
One candidate who tried to use a patriotic symbol found he had strayed quite a bit over line.
Republican David Dewhirst, running for lieutenant governor in Texas, chose a soldier in uniform against an American flag urging readers to support the brave men and women of our armed forces.
Unfortunately, it was a German soldier bearing a military insignia and name tag which carry the German flag.
The campaign manager blames the graphics consultant, but no one caught it until the ad, in this month s Texas Monthly, hit the stands.
Dan Rather is anchor and managing editor of the CBS Evening News .
He also is anchor of 48 Hours and a correspondent for 60 Minutes II. 
Since 1962, when Dan Rather first joined CBS News , he has handled some of the most challenging assignments in journalism.
His day-to-day commitment to substantive, fair and accurate news reporting and his tough, active style have earned him a position of respect among his peers and the public. 
For Rather, 1998 began with the Pope's visit to Cuba in early January, an assignment which was cut short by a dramatic turn of events in Washington D.C., when news broke of the Monica Lewinsky scandal.
Rather flew to the nation's capital to cover the first few days of what would be a year-long story ending in February 1999 with the impeachment of President Clinton by the House of Representatives. 
With the Lewinsky scandal dominating headlines in 1998, Washington was a frequent dateline for Rather, who was also there to cover the State of the Union Address in late January. 
In September, Rather was on the scene in New Orleans when Hurricane Georges struck the Gulf Coast.
This was followed in November by coverage of the mid-term elections which Rather anchored from New York, and which bore the mark of his now much-anticipated "Rather-isms." 
Rather also contributes reports to CBS News' 60 Minutes II , which premiered in January 1999.
As a correspondent for the broadcast, Rather secured an exclusive interview with President Clinton on March 31, 1999.
It was the president's first sit-down interview since the Lewinsky scandal and his own impeachment.
Rather interviewed first lady Hillary Clinton in another exclusive interview on May 26, 1999, her first wide-ranging one since January 1998. 
Rather was the first U.S. anchor on the scene in Belgrade in the middle of NATO's bombing of Yugoslavia, reporting for several CBS News broadcasts, including the CBS Evening News .
While there, he interviewed Professor Mira Markovic, the wife of President Slobodan Milosovic and a political powerhouse in her own right.
The interview was broadcast on 60 Minutes . 
In 1997, Rather's ongoing reporting on the trial of Oklahoma City bomber Timothy McVeigh was highlighted by exclusive interviews with the brother and wife of accused accomplice Terry Nichols and McVeigh lawyer Stephen Jones. 
Rather's moving interview with a grieving Bill Cosby following the murder of his son, Ennis, made headlines around the world and helped focus national attention not only on the crime but on Ennis' contributions to special education. 
In May, Rather returned to his roots in two ways: he conducted a rare interview with playwright Horton Foote, a fellow native of Wharton, Texas, for CBS News Sunday Morning , and he launched a syndicated weekly newspaper column, "Part of Our World," harking back to his early days in journalism as a print reporter. 
Rather traveled to Hong Kong in June to anchor CBS News' coverage of the colony's turnover to Chinese rule.
He also made another trip to China, traveling by train deep into the heartland of boomtowns and rice paddies and recalling his previous reports from China on events ranging from President Richard M. Nixon's historic visit in 1972 to the pro-democracy demonstrations in Tiananmen Square in 1989. 
He was again anchoring from overseas in September, covering the funerals of Princess Diana and Mother Theresa. 
On a more personal note, August saw the dedication of Rather's birthplace as part of the Wharton County Historical Museum. 
In 1996, the year that marked the 15th anniversary of his tenure as anchor and managing editor of the CBS Evening News , Rather covered his 11th presidential campaign.
He also traveled to Moscow to report on the Russian elections. 
In 1995, Rather made two trips to the front lines in Bosnia, reporting on American peacekeeping troops.
He first began reporting from the region a quarter-century ago.
There he had unparalleled access to the political and military leaders of this bloody struggle, as well as the innocent civilians caught in the crossfire. 
October 1995 found Rather literally once more in the eye of the storm, reporting on Hurricane Opal as it approached the Florida shore while two producers "anchored the anchor," clinging to his arms and legs during the ferociously high winds. 
He reported on the assassination of Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin from Jerusalem and was the only American anchor on site at Rabin's funeral in November. 
Also in 1995, he covered the 50th anniversary of V-E Day from London, then followed President Bill Clinton to Russia to cover the Moscow summit.
He made incisive contributions to four CBS Reports documentaries: "In the Killing Fields of America," "Victory in Japan" with retired Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, "The Religious Right" and "The Gulf War 5." 
He also anchored and contributed reports to all three of the CBS News broadcasts on the Smithsonian Institution, at one point dropping miles beneath the surface of the sea to study the ocean floor. 
Rather began 1994 with a trip to Eastern Europe for reports on the rise of neo-fascism in the former Soviet Bloc, on the civil war in the Georgian Republic and on President Clinton's first Russian summit. 
He spent most of April in South Africa, covering that country's first attempt at true democracy and interviewing candidates of all the major parties in the elections.
He went to the Middle East just before the Palestinians moved into Gaza and the West Bank and conducted interviews with Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak. 
His reporting from Haiti was perhaps Rather's most memorable of the year.
The only network anchor on the scene before and during the crisis, he was in the thick of the action, obtaining several exclusive interviews with Haiti's military leader, Lt. Gen. Raoul Cedras. 
He has interviewed every United States president from Dwight D. Eisenhower to Bill Clinton and virtually every major international leader of the past 30 years.
In 1990, he was the first American journalist to interview Saddam Hussein after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. 
In October 1994, Rather was honored by his alma mater, Sam Houston State University in Huntsville, Texas, which named its journalism and communications building after him. 
Rather's
most recent book is Deadlines & Datelines , a collection of essays.
He also has published an abridgment of Mark Sullivan's landmark popular history, Our Times: America at the Dawn of the Twentieth Century.
In addition, he is the author of The Camera
Never Blinks Twice:
The Further Adventures of a Television Journalist , I Remember , The Camera Never Blinks , and The Palace Guard . 
In addition to his weekly newspaper column, he continues to be a much-sought-after contributor to many of the top newspapers and magazines in the country and speaks out frequently on journalistic ethics. 
Since the start of his career in 1950, Rather has been in the middle of the world's defining moments.
From Nov. 22, 1963 in Dallas, when Rather worked around the clock to keep the American people informed of the details of the assassination of John F. Kennedy, to the 1968 Democratic National Convention, to Beijing, Bosnia, Haiti and Hong Kong more than two decades later, he has covered most of the world's major news stories.
His reporting on the civil rights movement in the South, the White House, the wars in Vietnam, Afghanistan, the Persian Gulf and Yugoslavia and the quest for peace in South Africa and the Middle East has showcased his combination of street smarts and astute analysis. 
He has received virtually every honor in broadcast journalism, including numerous Emmy Awards, the Peabody Award and citations from critical, scholarly, professional and charitable organizations.
He is regularly cited as "best anchor" in opinion surveys. 
During his 35 years with CBS News , Rather has held many prestigious positions, ranging from co-editor of 60 Minutes to anchor of CBS Reports and anchor of the weekend and weeknight editions of the CBS Evening News .
He has served as CBS News bureau chief in London and Saigon and was the White House correspondent during the Johnson and Nixon administrations. 
Since March 9, 1981, Rather has served as anchor and managing editor of the CBS Evening News .
He has also anchored and reported for 48 Hours since its premiere on Jan. 19, 1988.
His regular contributions to CBS News Radio include Dan Rather Reporting , a weekday broadcast of news and analysis, which has been presented on the CBS Radio Network since March 9, 1981. 
Rather joined CBS News in 1962 as chief of its Southwest bureau in Dallas.
In 1963, he was appointed chief of the Southern bureau in New Orleans, responsible for coverage of news events in the South, Southwest, Mexico and Central America.
During that time, he reported on racial conflicts in the South and the crusade of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
On Nov. 22, 1963 in Dallas, he broke the news of the death of President John F. Kennedy. 
Rather began his career in journalism in 1950 as an Associated Press reporter in Huntsville, Texas.
Later, he was a reporter for United Press International , KSAM Radio in Huntsville , KTRH Radio in Houston and the Houston Chronicle .
He became news director of KTRH in 1956 and a reporter for KTRK-TV Houston in 1959.
Prior to joining CBS News , Rather was news director for KHOU-TV, the CBS affiliate in Houston. 
He was born Oct. 31, 1931 in Wharton, Texas.
In 1953, he received a bachelor's degree in journalism from Sam Houston State Teachers College, where he spent the following year as a journalism instructor.
He also attended the University of Houston and the South Texas School of Law. 
John Roberts has been the anchor for the Sunday edition of the CBS Evening News since March 1995.
He also is senior White House correspondent for CBS News .
Before his current assignment at the White House, Roberts contributed reports on medical and health issues and a wide variety of other subjects, primarily on the weeknight CBS Evening News With Dan Rather. 
Roberts was one of the first television news reporters to report live from the scene of the bombing at the Summer Olympic Games in Atlanta on July 27, 1996.
Roberts was just a few blocks away when the bomb exploded at 1:27 AM, and was able to get on the air an hour later.
His live report from a rooftop overlooking the scene lasted nearly 11 hours. 
He also anchored breaking coverage of the Oklahoma City bombing on April 19, 1995.
That was two years to the day after he had anchored special reports of the fire at the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Texas.
He anchored live Sunday morning coverage of the October 1993 capture of the Russian White House by anti-Yeltsin forces. 
Roberts' extensive reporting experience includes live on-site coverage of the Northridge, California, earthquake; the fires in Laguna Beach and Malibu, California; Hurricanes Hugo, Andrew, and Felix; the US intervention in Haiti, and the Cuban refugee crisis in Miami.
He has reported for CBS News from Nicaragua, Brazil, Jamaica, Japan, Britain, France, and Switzerland. 
Roberts has interviewed many prominent newsmakers, including President Bill Clinton, Vice President Al Gore, Yitzhak Rabin, Boris Yeltsin, and Benazir Bhutto. 
Roberts was previously co-anchor for Channel 2 News
At Five and Channel 2 News
At 11 on WCBS-TV, the CBS-owned television station in New York.
There, he anchored live coverage of the 1994 elections and of the New York City subway firebombing, for which he won a 1994 New York Press Club award.
He also contributed live on-site reports on the crisis in Haiti, the Cuban refugee crisis in Florida, the USAir Flight 427 crash in Pittsburgh, and Woodstock '94. 
He joined CBS News in June 1992 as co-anchor of the CBS Morning News .
Prior to that, he had been co-anchor of Canada A.M. , CTV's top-rated morning news program, and an anchor-correspondent at WCIX-TV Miami.
He had previously worked at City TV in Toronto as co-anchor of CityWide and anchor and correspondent of City Pulse .
In addition, he was a reporter and entertainment anchor for City Pulse . 
Roberts was born November 15, 1956 in Toronto and attended the University of Toronto. 
Russ Mitchell has anchored the CBS News Saturday morning program since September, 1997. 
Previously, he was a correspondent for the CBS News Washington bureau and a correspondent for the prime-time CBS News magazine Eye to Eye where he contributed reports on such topics as a mother's legal fight for custody of her child, and a new theory on the fate of pilot Amelia Earhart. 
Other stories included the truth about a black West Point cadet who was beaten nearly to death and then discharged in disgrace from the academy, and a Houston neighborhood's efforts to rid itself of drug dealers by buying and then destroying the buildings from which they operate.
He filed reports for Eye to Eye from Russia, Chile, Indonesia, and France, in addition to covering the 1994 US operation in Haiti. 
Prior to his Eye to Eye assignment, Mitchell served as co-anchor of the CBS News overnight broadcast Up to the Minute , which premiered in 1992, the year he joined CBS News as a New York-based correspondent. 
Previously, Mitchell had been a weekend anchor and daily reporter with KMOV-TV, the CBS affiliate in St. Louis; a reporter at KTVI-TV in St. Louis; and an anchor at WFAA-TV, Dallas.
He began his broadcasting career in 1982 at KMBC-TV Kansas City. 
Mitchell has received numerous professional awards, including two Emmys from the St. Louis chapter of the National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences, a 1989 Best Reporter honor from United Press International in Missouri, and a 1995 National Association of Black Journalists news award. 
Mitchell was born March 25, 1960 in St. Louis.
He graduated from the University of Missouri with a bachelor's degree in journalism in 1982.
Thalia Assuras has been a CBS News correspondent since February 1997, reporting for a variety of CBS News broadcasts including This Morning and the CBS Evening News .
She served as anchor of Morning News and substitute anchor of This Morning. 
Previously, Assuras was co-anchor of Off Tenth , the live daily news program which aired on the CBS cable channel Eye
On People in 1997. 
She joined CBS News from ABC, where she was an anchor for World News
Now and World News
This Morning and served as a general assignment correspondent. 
Previously, Assuras anchored Canada AM , CTV's morning news broadcast, co-anchored Canada AM Weekend , and substitute-anchored the ACTV Weekend News .
She also served as a field reporter. 
Assuras was born in London, Ontario, Canada.
She graduated with honors from the University of Western Ontario with a bachelor of science degree in microbiology and immunology.
She later earned a master's degree in journalism.
Napster's song sharing service went dark Monday as the company continued to upgrade the network in preparation for advanced music-identification tools and the pending launch of a revamped, fee-based system. 
"File transfers have been temporarily suspended while Napster upgrades the databases that support our new file identification technology.
Keep checking this space for updates.
Thanks for your support!
" read a message on Napster's home page Monday. 
The Redwood City-based company has been scrambling to comply with a federal court-issued injunction to keep unauthorized music offline. 
Napster representatives did not immediately return calls seeking comment on the status of the system changes. 
The company has begun playing hardball lately with its users, who have long traded MP3 file versions of popular music with little regard to copyright issues.
The latest version of the Napster application, a forced upgrade to the system that no longer allows the use of previous versions, contains new filtering technology to identify song files accurately. 
The result has been a drastic drop in the number of songs shared and the number of users sharing them. 
On June 27, a snapshot of Napster activity revealed 320,000 users sharing an average of 1.5 songs each, a dramatic drop from an average 1.57 million users sharing 220 songs each at the peak of the service in February, according to researcher Webnoize. 
Normal fluctuations in the Napster usage does not account for the sharp decline of music traders online, Bailey said. 
"The new client is being used to test Napster's fingerprinting technology for the company's planned commercial service," said Webnoize senior analyst Matt Bailey.
"By further reducing the music available through the current service, Napster has provided another nail in the coffin of the service consumers originally loved." 
The new fee-based Napster has no specific launch date, but has been promised before summer's end by German media giant Bertlesmann AG, Napster's primary financial backer. 
A crucial parliamentary debate on Macedonia's peace process dragged into Wednesday with members of the largest party making increasingly defiant speeches against the Western-crafted deal. 
But with intense international pressure on the lawmakers, there were high expectations that the agreement granting minority ethnic Albanians more rights would be allowed to move ahead. 
The pending vote to approve the framework for later constitutional changes is just the first step by parliament and an important gesture to maintain momentum in efforts to end the six-month old insurgency by ethnic Albanian rebels demanding greater rights. 
Approval will clear the way for NATO to resume collecting weapons voluntarily handed over by the rebels, and push parliament to the next phase of debating specific constitutional changes in the step-by-step process. 
A rejection of the agreement would throw the whole peace deal into question.
The rebels, known as the National Liberation Army, are unlikely to continue disarming if the Macedonian side does not adhere to its promises of constitutional changes. 
Under the accord, forged with American and European mediators last month, ethnic Albanians would receive greater political and language rights.
They comprise about a third of the nation's 2 million people. 
Many of the deputies echo the cries of Macedonian street protesters: the perception that the accord rewards violence, as a trade-off for the end of fighting by ethnic Albanian rebels, yet fails to completely cripple the NLA. 
"The Macedonian nation is bleeding.
We have been humiliated.
We have lost.
We are victims of aggression," said Ilija Prangovski.
"It is our right to defend ourselves and no one, not even NATO, the USA or EU, have the right to take this away from us.
This parliament is the last bastion of our defense that someone is bent on destroying, regardless of the consequences." 
Still, the top ranks of the leading VMRO party promised to back the accord with all its 47 votes in the 120-seat parliament, and told Western envoys that defectors could face party expulsion. 
VMRO backing combined with that of the 24 ethnic Albanian legislators and the former communists is key to reach the two-thirds majority needed to move along the peace process. 
The party leader, Prime Minister Ljubco Georgievski, signed the pact but later called it too sweeping.
He told parliament, however, to "look reality in the eye" and back the plan as a way to save the country's slumping economy. 
Georgievski's support was tempered, leaving open the option of a future showdown over the rights reforms. 
"It is only the beginning ... we are being forced to change the constitution under pressure and aggression," he said in an address late Monday. 
But ethnic Albanian leader Arben Xhaferi warned: "If this peace deal is not passed ... it will multiply the problems." 
NATO has already collected more than a third of the 3,300 rebel weapons to be surrendered by late September.
The next phase calls for another third or about 1,100 weapons to be gathered.
The collection of the last remaining arms begins once parliament has passed the 36 amendments to change the constitution. 
"The whole world is waiting for us to take this initial subtle decision," said Mitko Ilevski.
"We are asked to turn over a new page in history.
Time will be our test." 
By Elena Becatoros
And that saga is not over yet: Mr. Clinton could soon become the first ex-president to be indicted by a federal grand jury, and could become the second - after Richard Nixon, post-Watergate - to be disbarred. 
"Forever in history, the opening graph in his - whether it's an obituary or a textbook - will be that he was impeached, that he lied to the American people, that he is not a role model per se in the way that we've put presidents like Washington and Jefferson and Lincoln on pedestals - and that no mother or father in America is telling their children, 'I want you to grow up and be like Bill Clinton,'" says Brinkley. 
Even so, l'affaire Lewinsky was about more than sex, lies and audiotape.
Bill Strauss, an author on American generations, places this political and legal struggle as one more battlefield between opposing cultural camps of boomers in a long-running fight that dates backs to the 1960's. 
"The impeachment debate was a culture wars debate.
It split the country into these two halves more geographically than had existed before," says Strauss, also a co-founder of the Capitol Steps, a musical political satire group in Washington, D.C. 
Too Centrist
By Half? 
On the peace-and-prosperity front, the numbers are beyond spin and are in Mr. Clinton's favor: America's economy enjoyed its longest peacetime expansion during his two terms in office. 
Clearly, Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan and Republican Congresses with their fiscally tight attitude played their parts.
And yes, the American people deserve the lion's share of the kudos, including higher productivity as a result of the dot-com boom.
Still, Mr. Clinton set the tone by focusing on the economy "like a laser beam" and moving his Democratic Party toward the center from day one. 
"He has ended the traditional definition of liberalism as we knew it, and I think what Clinton has done is associate the liberal tradition with capitalism, with the marketplace," historian Joseph Ellis told CBS News' Sunday Morning.
"It's a recognition that you must engage the entrepreneurial energies of the public in order to generate the kind of wealth that can then spread out and assist people at all levels." 
Topping the list of Clinton accomplishments: balancing the federal budget and enshrining trade at the heart of U.S. foreign policy, including the passage of NAFTA.
Also in the legacy mix: welfare reform, an anti-crime package, the Brady gun control law, NATO expansion, curbing Big Tobacco, family and medical leave, as well as preserving vast tracts of land for future generations.
Murkier is Clinton's record handling international flashpoints, from the Balkans and Asia to Russia, the Middle East, and Northern Ireland. 
"The rest of the world looks upon America as a very self-indulgent country that has one set of rules for itself and another set of rules for the rest of the world - and that keeps tossing its culture to the rest of the world, whether they want it or not.
It's both fun and annoying to them, but you could look at that and there's almost a parable for Clinton in that that's a lot of what he's represented to the world," says author Strauss. 
Whatever the final score, a laundry list of accomplishments does not etch a president's face on Mount Rushmore.
Brinkley sees Mr. Clinton as a competent and centrist custodian, rather than an innovator. 
"On the one hand, he won the presidency, he won re-election.
He warded off the Republican right" in Congress during the 1995 government shutdown and by co-opting the more mainstream chunks of the GOP agenda, Brinkley notes.
"He was able to tackle many of the big trade and economic issues he promised he would.
On another hand, nobody really knows what Bill Clinton stands for on anything." 
"Too often, it seemed like Bill Clinton was governing by poll-taking - reading the newest public opinion polls and pulse-taking - which is a very smart way of governing.
It meant he was centrist president who leaves office with a 65 percent approval rating," Brinkley adds. 
Health-care reform during the first Clinton term was meant to chart a bold direction, but ultimately it was a policy and political failure for both the president and first lady Hillary Rodham Clinton, who spearheaded the administration's effort.
Another early miscue: gays in the military, an issue that ended in the "don't ask, don't tell" debacle.
And the first Democrat who would be elected to two full terms since FDR also presided over his party's loss of Congress for the first time in four decades. 
"The Constitution gives me relevance," the president said after the 1994 midterm elections that elevated Republican Newt Gingrich to House speaker and the GOP's "Contract With America" to prominence. "
The power of our ideas gives me relevance." 
With or without a friendly Congress, as a man regarded by friend and foe as "the greatest politician of his generation," Mr. Clinton failed in paradigm-shifting politics when he tried.
But Ellis, who recently wrote a book on revolutionary leaders says Mr. Clinton - full name, William Jefferson Clinton - shares something with one of his earliest and greatest predecessors: Thomas Jefferson. 
"Their ability to move so adroitly from one position to another position in a way that would seem to be hypocrisy but which for them is obvious sincerity - that's the one thing that's on the one hand troubling to a lot of people," says Ellis of the two men.
"That's also the thing that makes them so effective as politicians." 
Still, in the long term, Mr. Clinton faces the rap of not trying when he could have, warns Brinkley. 
"Great leaders make their times.
And it is a bit unfair - he tried with health care and got shot down
and he had a lot of difficulty working with Congress - but a masterful politician knows how to deal with Congress.
A masterful politician is not quite as polarizing a character.
A masterful politician would have known how to lead America into a post-Cold War era," he says. 
"You don't do it by constantly having (one-time pollster)
Dick Morris feed you raw poll data and say, 'That's what I think.
That's where the American people are.
That's what I think.'
You're never gonna get bold, great leadership out of that.
What you can get is good governance, and I think Clinton did accomplish that." 
Offering a kinder take, Ellis points to Mr. Clinton's "Comeback Kid" resilience in the political arena. 
Yet to say Mr. Clinton was purely a victim of political circumstance - be it from a hostile Congress, the lack of a major foreign or domestic crisis on his watch, or an independent counsel and a right-wing chorus that he might liken to Inspector Javert - simply won't wash. 
Consider Theodore Roosevelt, the youngest man ever to become president.
When the energetic T.R. entered the Oval Office after the assassination of William McKinley a century ago, he had no mandate, either. 
"People thought he was a bit wacko.
The Republicans, his own party, didn't care for him.
The Democrats didn't care for him," Brinkley says of the first President Roosevelt. "
And he exerted a bold and innovative leadership that forever transformed not only the executive mansion - which he renamed 'The White House' - but ushered in the entire Progressive Era of massive reform, of trust-busting, of conservation measures unforeseen and thought of in that time." 
It's The Culture , Stupid! 
In stark contrast, scandal was a hallmark of the Clinton presidency. 
Whitewater, Travelgate, Filegate and campaign finance all made it on to that marquee, but there's no contest for Exhibit A: the Lewinsky affair.
Mr. Clinton's false testimony and public statements about his relationship with the one-time White House intern led to his impeachment by the House in 1998 and his acquittal by the Senate the following year. 
At this point, the top "pull quote" of the Clinton years is a tossup between "I did not have sexual relations with that woman, Miss Lewinsky." and "It depends on what the meaning of 'is' is."
On the cutting room floor: "The era of big government is over." 
"The woman was young enough to be his daughter.
But much worse than that - I think people have forgiven that - was the instinctive refusal to face up to it with the lying and the ducking," writer Andrew Sullivan of The New Republic told CBS News' Sunday Morning. 
"I think he will be remembered for impeachment," Sullivan adds.
As for Mr. Clinton's character, he says, "I think he has none.
And when you know that your president is that cynical about the truth, you can't help but think that he's demeaned the office permanently." 
Perhaps Bill Clinton's shadow may loom largest over our culture, in much the same way that it can be said that his fellow baby boomers do. 
"There is something about this generation that causes them not to see themselves the way other people do.
That applies to leaders like Clinton or Newt Gingrich or George W. Bush or Al Gore in the same way that it applies to people in the culture," says Strauss. 
But to blame all baby boomers for every lie, half-truth, distortion, and indiscretion by Mr. Clinton, the first president from their generation, is overkill, Brinkley cautions. 
"That means because you're the first baby boomer that means you have oral sex under the Oval Office desk?
That's not a generational thing, that's a character flaw.
You just can't throw all of it on to generations.
There is a bit of a charlatan in Bill Clinton, a bit of an amiable rake, which is his Achilles' heel," he says. 
"This is a man who had the eyeballs of the world on him, who knew better than anybody after Gennifer Flowers, out of all of the other flare-ups that he had, yet continued on his path of midnight rambling, sexual deviant side and could not put that under control," Brinkley adds. 
And so, the Lewinsky saga saw the collision of Mr. Clinton's tragic personal flaws with the culture war politics of his generation.
Never mind Vietnam, civil rights, abortion, or gun control.
Forget about sex, drugs, and rock 'n' roll.
Here, the personal was political - the "politics of personal destruction" - more than ever before, and faster than ever before. 
"One of the great ironies is, he oversaw this new information age, and it's the information age that helped destroy a lot of his presidency.
It was our ability to read the DNA on Monica's dress or to be able to know what books Monica checked out from Kramerbooks," says Brinkley.
"The readily available information that a president truly lives in a glass house, Bill Clinton oversaw that information age and also it boomeranged on him.
So he's an ironic and tragic figure in those regards." 
No Internet, no Matt Drudge.
No 24-7 cable channels, no readymade outlet for all things Clinton, O.J., etc.
Ad infinitum coverage, ad nauseum. 
Strauss contends the ripple effects of the ongoing Boomer culture clash extend to the recent protracted battle for the White House between Al Gore, Mr. Clinton's vice president, and George W. Bush, son of the man Mr. Clinton beat in 1992. 
"In a lot of ways, this culture war ended in a tie," he says.
"And the tensions between the two sides of boomers - the heartland values vs. the coastal, Hollywood-New York kind of values - is still a very serious thing in this country, and it's one that is likely to fuel division through the peak years of boomer leadership.
We haven't heard the end of it by any means." 
On the show-biz scale, Mr. Clinton was, at his best and his worst, a walking wealth of material. 
Look at his affinity with Hollywood, from hanging out with and raising money from the entertainment glitterati to playing the sax on Arsenio Hall or answering the "boxers or briefs" question on MTV.
Late-night comedy - from Letterman to Leno, from Conan O'Brien to Saturday Night Live , from Politically Incorrect to The Daily Show , and more - all thrived on Mr. Clinton's star quality in the spotlight, his craving for the limelight, and, of course, his misfortunes. 
"This man has been funny.
He also himself has drawn less of a distinction between being a leader and being an entertainer.
He's blurred that line ...
Bill Clinton goes forward as a stand-up comic, and as an entertainer," says Strauss. 
What remains to be seen is whether our first "infotainment president" makes the real job more difficult for his successors down the road. 
"There is this tendency of Boomers to pass through a phase of life and to grab everything they possibly can from it and then leave it something of a shambles when they leave," says Strauss.
"There's a real risk that this is happening here.
And I'm seeing interviews with Clinton talking about how, whatever one can say about his presidency, he had a lot of fun.
That is not the purpose of a presidency.
It may have been his purpose, or at least part of his purpose." 
Be it scandal or show-biz or both, that purpose might have been out of place for the highest office in the land. 
"It's an exulted spot where honor and duty have to be hand in hand.
Bill Clinton was very good on duty.
He did his duty well
- he was no slacker in the Oval Office.
But he never understood the sense of honor - and you need that combination of both to be a truly effective president," Brinkley says. 
In the historical legacy sweepstakes, Mr. Clinton hopes rest with those Americans that he and his wife, now a U.S. senator from New York and the first first lady ever elected to office, have often trumpeted in their rhetoric: "the children." 
Historians may bicker until the end of time, but the generation that came of age during his presidency will have the most definitive say about it.
Today's high-school kids and college students will be the last living link to the Clinton era.
Their books, their movies, their music will lay the foundation of the enduring memory of the man for posterity. 
"That's why, if I were Bill Clinton concerned about how schoolchildren would read about me 150 years from now, I would very much try to make my peace with today's high-school kids and tomorrow's college kids, because they do have an opinion of him that is checkered at best," says Strauss. 
That challenge holds peril as well as promise for Mr. Clinton. 
"He may need to tell this generation more forthrightly than he has that he acknowledges the final responsibility for what he did, which is not just 'I did it, I take responsibility, and then I turn my back and walk out of the room,' but that there are deeper historical responsiblities," says Strauss.
"And one of the consequences is today's kids are behaving better, and he's pleased that they are." 
As the youngest ex-president since Teddy Roosevelt, no one can say Bill Clinton will suffer from a lack of time on his hands to cross that bridge to the 21st century. 
Copyright MMI, Viacom Internet Services, All Rights Reserved.
There actually appears to be a bit less criticism in Washington about Mr. Bush's strategy than Mr. Clinton's.
Mr. Bush has benefited from Mr. Reagan's and Mr. Clinton's success in paving the way, but Mr. Bush has also played it smart with the Beltway crowd.
He made the obligatory pilgrimage to the Georgetown soiree of The Washington Post 's Kay Graham and her "A" list.
And, rather than lecturing them on the evils of the Washington as Mr. Clinton did to their horror in 1992, he said how honored he was to be there, invoked his mom and dad, and mainly schmoozed big time.
His staff is also a bit more deferent.
Jeff Eller, who had Tucker Eskew's job with Mr. Clinton, publicly delighted in telling the White House press corps he was going around them.
Mr. Eskew refers to them as being a part of "one big mission." 
And then there's Dick Cheney.
There's nothing Washington likes more than someone who's been here before.
And, as Cheney constantly points out, this is his fourth tour of duty.
It was Cheney who put together the budget (with a small group of powerful advisors "with little hands on involvement of the President" according to The Washington Post ) and Cheney who stays on top of foreign policy.
Cheney told the National Association of Manufacturers this week that he has an "informal weekly lunch" with Secretary of State Colin Powell, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, and National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice to coordinate foreign affairs. 
The buzz during the transition was that Cheney's dominance was making Mr. Bush look weak and irrelevant.
But the Bushies say this doesn't worry W. at all.
And maybe he's right to relax.
A CBS Poll question on whether Mr. Bush is really running the country turned in his favor this week, at least among people who watched his first prime-time speech.
61 percent of those who watched now think that he'll be in charge of what goes on in his administration, while 39 percent say other people will be running the country.
However, among the non-viewers, 40 percent believe "Bush is in charge," compared to 60 percent who say "other people" would be in charge. 
The Bushies are betting, however, that some of those non-viewers will be watching the weather and sports in Fargo and Winnetka when the president comes to town, will hear "unfettered" about how wonderful he'll make their schools and their bank accounts, and won't worry too much about who's in charge, either.
Microsoft Corp. has been given more time to respond to the European Union's concerns about allegedly anticompetitive business practices, the EU's competition commissioner said Wednesday. 
The commissioner, Mario Monti, also called "premature" a report that the EU may decide to fine the software giant, saying Microsoft has yet to give its side in the EU's antitrust case. 
A fine "is no more than a possibility at this stage," Monti said.
"To speak of a fine when Microsoft has not yet disputed the Commission's preliminary findings both in fact and law, as is its right, is premature.
" 
The European Commission, which enforces EU rules, warned in August that Microsoft may be violating antitrust laws by bundling its Media Player into its Windows operating system, and that Microsoft may have used "illegal practices" to extend its dominance in personal computers into server markets. 
Microsoft had two months to respond in writing to the EU's preliminary statement of objections, but Monti said the company has been granted "a short extension." 
After that is received, Microsoft also will present its arguments at an oral hearing. 
The Wall Street Journal reported Wednesday that the EU may seek a fine from Microsoft Corp. and demand that it drop some features from its dominant Windows software. 
It said the fine may be higher because the Commission believes Microsoft lied to investigators and sought to obstruct the case by presenting false letters purporting to support its case. 
Monti declined to comment on the details of the report. 
Under EU law, the Commission can fine a violator up to 10 percent of its annual revenue, or potentially $2.5 billion in Microsoft's case.
In practice, though, fines have never exceeded 1 percent. 
At a news conference, Monti noted that a statement of objections sent to a company "is by no means a final conclusion," but can change after the target presents its evidence. 
In a case against DaimlerChrysler decided Wednesday, for example, the initial finding that the German automaker had engaged in a "general strategy" to subvert internal market rules on car distribution was later dropped, he said. 
The latest EU charges, similar to a U.S. judge's findings regarding Microsoft's Internet Explorer, adds to an ongoing EU investigation into allegations that Microsoft is illegally leveraging its dominance in the market for operating systems for personal computers into that for bigger, more powerful machines. 
In the U.S. case, Microsoft is negotiating with U.S. authorities on whether to proceed with settlement talks.
If the two sides fail to reach an agreement, a federal judge said she is prepared to resume court proceedings early next year. 
By PAUL GEITNER
New York City Democratic mayoral candidate Mark Green on Saturday denounced as misguided the aviation security bill passed by the U.S. House of Representatives and backed by President Bush. 
Delivering the Democrats' weekly radio address, Green also made a plug for a competing plan that won the unanimous approval of the Democratic-led U.S. Senate. 
The House bill would put the federal government in charge of airport security.
But unlike the Senate measure, baggage and passenger screeners would remain private rather than federal workers. 
hijacked-jetliner attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on Sept. 11. 
The two bills have many areas in common including fortifying cockpit doors, increasing air marshals and expanding check-in baggage inspections but take separate paths on how to tighten screening procedures. 
"If September 11 proved nothing else, it is that our airports and skyways are a national security front line," Green said.
"They must be patrolled by well-trained professionals, public servants with a strong sense of duty to their country," he said. 
"We wouldn't dream of outsourcing the functions of the Army or Navy, or replacing New York firefighters with private consultants," Green said.
"Why should aviation security be any different, especially after 9-11?" 
Green will face Republican financier Michael Bloomberg in Tuesday's election to succeed Rudolph Giuliani as mayor of New York City.
Polls show the race is neck and neck, with Bloomberg erasing a huge Green lead.
The popular Giuliani has endorsed Bloomberg. 
The House and Senate are expected to begin trying to resolve differences between their bills next week
so they can send a final unified measure to Bush to sign into law. 
House Speaker Dennis Hastert Friday urged Congress to get the aviation security bill to President Bush by Thanksgiving. 
The House on Thursday voted 286-139 to increase federal oversight of airport security, after narrowly rejecting the Senate bill. 
The action came after arm-twisting, last-minute amendments and procedural delays as both sides scrambled for votes. 
Mr. Bush urged fence-sitters to back the Republican bill, while flight attendants collared lawmakers on Capitol Hill to argue for the Senate version. 
Green said, "The Republican-controlled House of Representatives has failed to pass a strong piece of legislation, which would have provided uniform standards by federalizing the aviation security workforce." 
"Although this bill passed the Senate unanimously ...
House Republican leaders held it up for weeks, citing an increase in union membership as a main concern," he said. 
"Now they've passed a much-weaker alternative, which fails to end the flawed system of private outsourcing for aviation security, a system that too often puts the bottom line ahead of the safety of American travelers," Green warned. 
"The lowest bidders -- the ones who pay the lowest wages and invest the least in training -- get many of these contracts," he said. 
"We've seen several security lapses even since September 11, and some companies have faced criminal prosecutions and federal fines," the Democratic candidate said. 
Also on Saturday, federal authorities evacuated the Southwest Airlines concourse at Baltimore-Washington International Airport after a woman tried to "test" airport security at a checkpoint, officials said. 
One Boeing 737 had pushed back from the gate and two others were boarding at about 7:15 a.m., when the Federal Aviation Administration ordered scores of travelers out of the airport's 16-gate Concourse B for a security sweep that kept the facility shut for nearly three hours. 
Passengers then had to be re-screened before being allowed back onto their planes after the concourse reopened at about 9:50 a.m. 
There were no details from the FAA or airport officials about what happened at the checkpoint at BWI, located about 10 miles outside the city of Baltimore. 
"An individual was trying to test security, and she has been detained," said FAA spokesman Paul Takemoto.
Authorities said the woman was later released. 
"It is another example of a zero tolerance policy that's been in place since last week.
If security isn't operating properly, we shut the facility down," Takemoto said. 
Security has been tightened at U.S. airports since the Sept. 11 attacks. 
Federal officials, including President Bush, have since pronounced the airline travel system safe.
But authorities have been embarrassed several times by individuals smuggling box cutters and other banned items through checkpoints in order to call attention to lingering security gaps.
It is a subject of intense interest to millions and of personal interest to the reporter, Mike Wallace , and also to Tipper Gore.
Winston Churchill called it the black dog.
President Abraham Lincoln suffered from it so badly that he said "I am now the most miserable man living.
" 
It is clinical depression.
Less than three decades ago depression was shrouded in secrecy - a skeleton in the closet triggering guilt, shame and stigma.
But Tipper Gore is using her own experience to try to change all that. 
In 1972, the disease had suddenly caused a political storm.
That was the year presidential hopeful George McGovern chose Senator Tom Eagleton for his running mate, that is, until it was discovered that Eagleton had suffered from depression. 
That was the end of Eagleton s chance at the vice presidency.
But much has changed in the past quarter century.
Depression is more widely understood and is finally beginning to come out of the closet.
The woman who could be the next first lady, Tipper Gore, is talking openly about her encounter with the disease. 
It was just last year that Gore went public about her depression and she has since become a national spokesperson on the illness.
"I got a diagnosis: clinical depression," she says.
"I received treatment, which included medication and therapy.
And I m happy to say that they worked and I recovered." 
Gore says there s more acceptance of depression today and she points to some of those in politics who have gone public and survived, like Congressman Patrick Kennedy and the late governor of Florida, Lawton Chiles. 
But the question remains: If the president or the vice president of the United States is suffering from depression, are they capable of handling what is a very delicate, pressure-filled job? "
What about a person that's had multiple heart attacks?
We still entrust them with positions of authority," responds Gore.
" If they know about it and they've been treated, and been treated successfully, I think that we have to make the judgment about them in the context of their career and where they are." 
Last year, in working to remove the stigma associated with depression, Tipper Gore held the first ever White House Conference on Mental Health.
Of course, it s not just politicians or their wives who are afflicted. 
Today, an estimated 19 million Americans suffer from depression - young and old, men and women, the mighty and the obscure.
And even journalists, including 60 Minutes Correspondent Mike Wallace, which is why Tipper Gore invited him to speak at the White House conference on mental health. 
At that conference, Wallace spoke about his bouts of depression.
"I was lower than a snake s belly.
And my own doctor, my own general practitioner didn t pick it up.
I used to call him in the middle of the night.
And he said, 'Mike, you re strong.
You ll get over it.
You re strong.'
Well, the fact of the matter is I didn t," he explained. 
Dr. Fred Goodwin has been studying depression for more than 30 years.
He is the head of the National Institute of Mental Health. "
That's a very typical portrait.
And it s a valuable portrait," says Dr. Goodwin, referring Wallace's description of his experiences with the disease. 
Dr. Goodwin compares the knowledge of depression more than 25 years ago to what medical science knows now.
"In general terms, the picture we know today was already taking shape back then.
But we didn't have a lot of the - boxes filled in," says Dr. Goodwin.
"We didn't have a lot of the specificity.
Nor did we have what we now have, which are medications that are much more targeted.
We had effective medications.
But rather broad, with rather high ratios of side effects." 
While there is no blood test to determine if a person is suffering from depression, there are telltale signs.
Tipper Gore knows the signs well. "
Over-eating or under-eating.
It's over-sleeping or under-sleeping, having insomnia, early morning waking, or maybe sleeping too much, losing your ability to concentrate.
Using - losing your ability to take pleasure in things that you normally take pleasure in," explains Gore, "thoughts about suicide." 
In fact, it was that checklist that convinced Gore she had a problem.
She knew the symptoms.
She holds a master's degree in psychology and her own mother had suffered from depression.
But, the clues came from an outside source.
"I had - even though I knew a little bit about it, it was, you know, friends and others that came to me and said, 'Take a look at this checklist,'" says Gore. 
In 1989, her son had been in a near-fatal car accident.
It was after his recovery that Gore realized she needed help.
And it was in her family that she found compassion.
"I have to say that my husband was extremely supportive, willing to learn about how to help me...deal with this." 
Left untreated, depression can be a devastating illness and can even lead to suicide. "
Fortunately, I believe I got help before I got to that point," says Gore. 
For Gore, help consisted of medication and talk therapy, a combination recommended for serious bouts of clinical depression. 
Dr. Goodwin says that because of people like Gore, the old stigmatized notion of depression that haunted Tom Eagleton back in the 70s appears finally to be waning.
"Stigma is diminishing because people who are well known and respected by the public have come out and talked about their own depression," says Dr. Goodwin. 
Gore says her personal fight against depression will not desist if she becomes first lady.
"This is a big priority with me.
It's a lifelong commitment, no matter where I find myself in the future," says Gore. 
And if she her husband loses the election in November, Gore says she will not let that affect her mental health.
"I hope that my husband is elected president because I think he'd be the very best president.
I support him.
But the campaign is not my life.
It's something that's a part of my life right now.
So I will go on no matter what happens in the fall." 
Copyright 2000, CBS Worldwide Inc., All Rights Reserved.
Israel called off planned truce talks with Palestinian President Yasser Arafat on Saturday, weakening hopes of ending almost a year of violence. 
An Israeli political source said Foreign Minister Shimon Peres, at the behest of Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, would not meet Arafat for talks which had been provisionally scheduled for Gaza on Sunday. 
"There won't be a meeting tomorrow.
Peres still wants to meet Arafat but Sharon thinks a meeting would be harmful at this time," the source said, adding there were no immediate plans to reschedule the talks. 
Palestinians and Western diplomats had said earlier in the day that they expected the meeting to go ahead in Gaza, but there was little hope of significant progress in the talks. 
"Sharon is showing his true face.
All he wants is to continue his aggression against the Palestinians," Palestinian Information Minister Yasser Abed Rabbo told Reuters in response to the cancellation of the talks.
President Bush continues to receive extremely high approval ratings, but the high levels of confidence expressed early this fall that the government would be able to capture the terrorists and protect the public show signs of weakening, according to the latest CBS News/New York Times poll. 
And in the wake of the recent deaths of several postal workers from anthrax and its discovery in letters sent to government leaders and the news media, majorities of the public think the government - national and state and local - has not done enough to prepare for a biological attack. 
While Americans in many parts of the country say they are not very concerned about a possible terrorist attack where they live, the percentage expecting an attack somewhere in the U.S. in the next few months has been steadily growing since September 11.
Now, 53 percent say an attack in the next few months is very likely. 
Many feel that they haven't been told enough about the current threat from anthrax.
Although 94 percent say they've been following the news about anthrax closely (with 56 percent following it very closely), less than half thinks that the government has been telling people everything they need to know about the anthrax attacks, a problem that may be alleviated by the decision made this weekend to have Homeland Security Director Tom Ridge brief the news media on a daily basis. 
Just 15 percent say they have a great deal of confidence that the government can protect its citizens from terrorist attacks involving anthrax, though most have at least some confidence.
And evaluations of government units' handling of the anthrax attacks are mixed - though the Bush administration is viewed more positively than Congress, both are viewed more positively than the Postal Service. 
Perhaps as a consequence, minorities of the public are prepared to dismiss public health officials' advice and take action on their own.
Over one in four have decided that people should ask their doctors for the drug Cipro as a precaution, and not wait for public health officials to recommend it for them.
And 8 percent say they want to be tested for the possibility of anthrax exposure now. 
One group that is especially cynical is the young.
Just under two-thirds of those under age 30 do not think the government is telling people all they need to know.
Younger adults are more likely to want to be tested for anthrax exposure, and to believe people should ask doctors now for Cipro. 
There is also a behavioral impact.
One in four Americans say they have become more cautious when opening their mail - and another 22 percent are seriously considering doing that.
Even more of those under 30 say their behavior has changed. 
Most Americans continue to be confident that the U.S. will succeed in its war against terrorism, but as the war continues, some of the initial optimism Americans expressed seems to be fading. 
Now, 28 percent are very confident that the U.S. government will capture or kill bin Laden, and 42 percent are somewhat confident.
Three weeks ago, as the military attacks began, 38 percent were very confident, and 38 percent were somewhat so, in the ability of the U.S. to capture or kill bin Laden. 
And fewer now think the war is going very well for the U.S. than thought so three weeks ago.
Twenty-five percent now say the war is going very well for the U.S.
Just after the initial air attacks began, 36 percent said that.
Fifty-eight percent now think the war is going somewhat well, while 13 percent think it is going somewhat or very badly. 
Anti-American rallies in Pakistan and in some Middle Eastern countries may have reduced public confidence that America's allies will all stand behind her.
Now, 29 percent are very confident the U.S. government will be able to hold together the international alliance of countries supporting U.S. military efforts; three weeks ago, 46 percent felt that way. 
There are limits as well in the public's confidence that the government will be able to catch those responsible for sending anthrax through the mail - 23 percent are very confident about that, fewer than are still confident that the U.S. will capture or kill bin Laden. 
Most still have some confidence in the U.S.'s ability to protect its citizens from another terrorist attack, but even there confidence is shrinking.
Confidence in the government's ability to protect its citizens from a terrorist attack involving anthrax is slightly lower, with less than one in five expressing a great deal of confidence in government being able to do either. 
But this lowered confidence level hasn't made people more concerned about terrorism in their community.
In fact, if anything, most people's concerns about terrorism in their own backyards has lessened.
Twenty-six percent now are very concerned about a terrorist attack where they live.
Three weeks ago 30 percent felt that way.
On September 11, that figure was 43 percent.
There are differences by gender, and differences based on where people live. 
About the same number - 28 percent - are very concerned about a biological or chemical attack such as anthrax in their area. 
Support for the U.S.-led military attacks in Afghanistan, despite the increased worries, remains extremely high.
Now, 88 percent approve of the attacks, and 8 percent disapprove, unchanged since the attacks began three weeks ago. 
Fewer Americans - although still a sizable majority - support the U.S. providing humanitarian aid to the people of Afghanistan.
Seventy-eight percent approve of the U.S. doing so, and 18 percent disapprove. 
As has been the case since just after the September 11th attacks, Americans expect this to be a drawn out conflict; 64 percent think the military attacks will take longer than several months.
Twenty-three percent expect it to take several months, and 7 percent think the conflict will last several more weeks. 
But the much larger war on terrorism is expected to take longer than the military action in Afghanistan.
Eighty-eight percent now think the war on terrorism will last a year or longer, up from 65 percent three weeks ago.
Only 6 percent think that war will last several months. 
Many also expect the conflict to spread to other parts of the Middle East.
Thirty-two percent think it is very likely that the military action in Afghanistan will become a more widespread military action in neighboring countries and other parts of the world, and 51 percent think this is somewhat likely. 
But this lengthy and potentially broader war is viewed as worthwhile, even in the face of significant American military casualties.
Sixty-one percent think the war in Afghanistan would be worth it even if it meant several thousand American troops would lose their lives; 27 percent say the war there would not be worth that cost. 
At the start of the Gulf War, 45 percent thought a ground war would be worth fighting even it if meant several thousand American military casualties, and 42 percent thought it would not be worthwhile. 
Many Americans see the goal of the military action in Afghanistan as much broader than just getting rid of Osama bin Laden.
Forty-eight percent think the main goal is to eliminate all terrorists from the country; 18 percent think the goal is to topple the Taliban government, and 16 percent think the goal is to eliminate bin Laden.
Those goals are in accordance with what Americans believe the U.S. ought to be doing in Afghanistan.
Fifty-seven percent of the public thinks the goal there should be to eliminate all terrorists. 
When it comes to dissent in the U.S., 53 percent believe Americans who oppose U.S. military action in Afghanistan should be free to hold protest marches and rallies, while 38 percent think that hurts the war effort. 
The September 11th terrorist attacks affected more than just the people in New York City and Washington.
More than a third of all Americans say they have felt nervous or edgy since the attacks (one in five say they still do), and 17 percent have had trouble sleeping. 
Not surprisingly, people living in big cities and the Northeast are more likely than others to report suffering from these adverse effects.
The national level of edginess and sleeplessness is significantly lower than that recorded among New Yorkers in a CBS News/New York Times poll conducted earlier this month.
In that poll, 42 percent of New Yorkers said they still felt nervous, and 22 percent said they were still having trouble sleeping at night. 
Women are much more likely than men to have experienced - and to be still experiencing - these effects of the terrorist attacks.
More than a quarter of women nationwide say they still feel nervous nowadays, and one in ten are still having trouble sleeping, compared with 14 percent and 3 percent of men respectively. 
The terrorist attacks have had an economic impact nationally as well.
Nearly one in ten people in the U.S. labor force say they have lost their job or a significant amount of income since the attack.
The economic aftermath of the attack has been felt in all regions, though less so in the South.
The national impact is about half the size of the impact in New York City. 
The improvement in perceptions of the economy that happened after the September 11th attacks has all but disappeared.
Now, 56 percent think the economy is in good shape, and 42 percent think it is in bad shape.
Three weeks ago, 66 percent thought the economy was good, and 29 percent thought it was bad.
Just before the September attacks, the outlook was about what it is now, marking some of the lowest levels in positive assessment of the economy in years. 
Thirty-seven percent now think the economy is getting worse, 14 percent think it is getting better and 46 percent think it is staying the same. 
The terrorist attacks made Americans spend more time with their families and friends.
More than one-third of Americans say they have been spending more time with their family and close friends in the weeks after the terrorist attacks. 
Women are more likely than men to have spent more time with families and friends since the September 11th attacks, 40 percent to 29 percent.
Those in the Northeast are also more likely to have spent more time together with their family and close friends than the rest of Americans. 
Just under one in ten Americans has canceled trips because of the terrorist attacks, and travel over the upcoming holidays may also be lower than usual.
Seventeen percent of Americans say they plan to travel by plane during the Thanksgiving or Christmas holidays this year; that number is lower than the percentage who traveled by air for last year's holidays. 
Half of those who traveled last year won't this year - but one in ten Americans who didn't travel by plane during the 2000 holiday season will in 2001. 
Fear of flying is a factor in the expected drop in air travel for the holidays.
Among those who say they are not at all afraid of flying, just about the same percentage - one in four - report plans to fly this Thanksgiving or Christmas as say they flew last year. 
But far fewer of those afraid or bothered by flying plan to travel by plane this year than did so for the 2000 holidays.
Just 8 percent of fearful fliers say they plan to travel by plane this year, while twice as many, 15 percent, say they flew last year.
Twelve percent of those bothered slightly by flying say they'll fly this year; 18 percent of that group say they flew last year. 
The public clearly believes the government should take an increased role in airport security - and take the responsibility for hiring and supervising airport security employees.
And while more think the government has done enough to improve airport security since September 11 than think the airlines have, it's clear that many think both the government and the airlines need to be doing more. 
Half of Americans say the federal government has done enough to improve airport security, but 42 percent feel the government hasn't done enough.
When asked about the airlines, just 42 percent say the airlines have done enough to improve airport security, while 50 percent think they have not. 
The federal government has a major role in providing airport security, according to nearly all Americans.
When asked who should be responsible for airport security personnel, 91 percent say the federal government should have some responsibility.
But the president and the U.S. Senate currently are at odds on what kind of government responsibility. 
The airport security bill passed by the Senate places the full responsibility for airport security on the federal government, making those workers government employees.
President Bush favors government supervision of private contractors.
The public clearly takes the Senate's side, 52 percent to 39 percent.
Forty-six percent of Republicans agree with the Democratic-controlled Senate on this issue. 
Despite Americans' focus on airport security and the significant decline in air travel, 46 percent the public say they are not at all afraid to fly, up just slightly from September, immediately after the attacks.
Thirty-one percent say flying bothers them slightly and 21 percent admit they are afraid of flying.
But fears do influence behavior.
Among those who have actually flown since September 11, only 3 percent say they're afraid of flying. 
The president continues to enjoy exceptionally high approval ratings for his handling of the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, but they have gone down slightly from earlier this month.
As was the case at the start of the U.S. military attacks on Afghanistan, Americans overwhelmingly approve of the job President Bush is doing.
Large majorities approve of his handling of the war on terrorism, foreign policy and the economy. 
Eighty-seven percent of Americans now approve of Mr. Bush's job as president while only 8 percent disapprove.
A few weeks ago, Mr. Bush received an overall job approval of 90 percent, his highest to date. 
When it comes to his handling of foreign policy, Mr. Bush's rating has gone up significantly since before the terrorist attacks in September.
Currently, 74 percent of Americans approve of the way the president his handling foreign policy, up from 49 percent two months ago. 
Now, 88 percent approve of his handling of the attacks and 8 percent disapprove.
Earlier this month, 92 percent approved and 4 percent disapproved.
When asked specifically how Mr. Bush is handling the war on terrorism, 79 percent approve of the job he doing, while 16 percent disapprove. 
Despite the impact of the terrorist attacks on the U.S. economy, a majority of Americans also approve of the job Mr. Bush is doing handling it.
Almost two-thirds now approve of his handling of this issue.
However, this is down somewhat from a few weeks ago when 71 percent of the public approved of the job he was doing - the highest economic approval rating Bush had received since assuming office.
Only 25 percent disapprove of his handling of the economy. 
Congressional approval has also risen since September.
Now, 67 percent approve of the job Congress is doing, up from 43 percent in August. 
The increase in government support that has been noted since September 11th as the nation rallied itself after the attack may, even now, have limits.
While trust in government is higher than before the attacks, it is lower than that recorded in some polls just a few weeks ago.
And there is no indication that the public is significantly more supportive of a larger government supplying more services than it was before the attacks. 
In this poll, 61 percent say that things in this country are generally headed in the right direction, a level not reached or neared since two other rally points - the end of the Persian Gulf War and the revelations about President Bill Clinton and Monica Lewinsky in early 1998.
Just 29 percent say things are on the wrong track.
But in the week following September 11, as many as 72 percent of Americans in an NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll said things were headed in the right direction. 
More than half - 55 percent - say they trust the government in Washington to do what is right all or most of the time - more than ever recorded in a CBS News/New York Times poll.
But that figure, too, is down from one recorded in a Washington Post poll conducted in late September. 
There is a partisan cast to those figures, with Republicans more trusting of government than Democrats - at least for now.
Independents look more like Democrats than like Republicans on this question. 
However, while more Americans trust government, more also say they do not want government to get bigger.
Only four in ten say they want to have a bigger government, providing more services.
Nearly half want a smaller government providing fewer services.
The percentages are not all that much different from those seen earlier this year. 
In addition, a majority still believes that people in government waste a lot of money paid in taxes. 
The terrorist attacks appear to have changed little in American overall attitudes towards Israel, nor have they lessened public support for Israel in the Middle East conflict.
Forty-eight percent now say they are more in sympathy with Israel with regard to the situation in the Middle East, 19 percent say they sympathize more with the Arab nations and 13 percent sympathize with neither.
These views are largely unchanged compared with those ten years ago. 
Six in ten Americans have a favorable opinion about Israel.
Just under a quarter have an unfavorable opinion of Israel - views that are virtually unchanged since April 1998. 
In contrast, 22 percent say they have a favorable opinion about the Palestine Liberation Organization, while 57 percent say their opinion is unfavorable.
Favorable views of the P.L.O. have doubled, however, from three and a half years ago; then, only 11 percent said their opinion of the P.L.O. was favorable. 
Most Americans reject charges that that the U.S. has failed to adequately promote itself in the Middle East.
Sixty-two percent think the government is currently doing enough to help people in the Arab world understand what the U.S. is trying to do there, and 28 percent think it is not. 
Many also reject the statement that a major cause of the problems for the U.S. in the Middle East is that we have paid too much attention to Israel, and not enough attention to the Arab nations.
Thirty-nine percent agree with that, but 46 percent disagree. 
Men are more critical of the U.S. Middle East policy than women.
Forty-nine percent of men think U.S. policy in the Middle East is a major cause of the problems in the region, compared with 29 percent of women who think so. 
There has been a slight increase in support for one Arab goal - the establishment of a Palestinian state.
Thirty-eight percent favor the establishment of a Palestinian homeland in the occupied territories of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
Twenty-nine percent oppose that, and another one-third have no opinion one way or the other. 
But opinions of Saudi Arabia are not as positive as they have been in the past.
Most Americans do view Saudi Arabia as friendly towards the United States, but fewer see it as an ally than did so one year ago.
Only one in ten consider Saudi Arabia an ally of the United States, and about half now view Saudi Arabia as friendly but not an ally.
In a Gallup poll in May 2000, 19 percent thought of Saudi Arabia as an ally to the United States, and 37 percent said it was friendly but not an ally.
Nearly a third now consider Saudi Arabia as unfriendly or an enemy. 
This poll was conducted among a nationwide random sample of 1,024 adults, interviewed by telephone October 25-28, 2001.
The error due to sampling could be plus or minus three percentage points for results based on the entire sample. 
For detailed information on how CBS News conducts public opinion surveys, click here.
There actually appears to be a bit less criticism in Washington about Mr. Bush's strategy than Mr. Clinton's.
Mr. Bush has benefited from Mr. Reagan's and Mr. Clinton's success in paving the way, but Mr. Bush has also played it smart with the Beltway crowd.
He made the obligatory pilgrimage to the Georgetown soiree of The Washington Post 's Kay Graham and her "A" list.
And, rather than lecturing them on the evils of the Washington as Mr. Clinton did to their horror in 1992, he said how honored he was to be there, invoked his mom and dad, and mainly schmoozed big time.
His staff is also a bit more deferent.
Jeff Eller, who had Tucker Eskew's job with Mr. Clinton, publicly delighted in telling the White House press corps he was going around them.
Mr. Eskew refers to them as being a part of "one big mission." 
And then there's Dick Cheney.
There's nothing Washington likes more than someone who's been here before.
And, as Cheney constantly points out, this is his fourth tour of duty.
It was Cheney who put together the budget (with a small group of powerful advisors "with little hands on involvement of the President" according to The Washington Post ) and Cheney who stays on top of foreign policy.
Cheney told the National Association of Manufacturers this week that he has an "informal weekly lunch" with Secretary of State Colin Powell, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, and National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice to coordinate foreign affairs. 
The buzz during the transition was that Cheney's dominance was making Mr. Bush look weak and irrelevant.
But the Bushies say this doesn't worry W. at all.
And maybe he's right to relax.
A CBS Poll question on whether Mr. Bush is really running the country turned in his favor this week, at least among people who watched his first prime-time speech.
61 percent of those who watched now think that he'll be in charge of what goes on in his administration, while 39 percent say other people will be running the country.
However, among the non-viewers, 40 percent believe "Bush is in charge," compared to 60 percent who say "other people" would be in charge. 
The Bushies are betting, however, that some of those non-viewers will be watching the weather and sports in Fargo and Winnetka when the president comes to town, will hear "unfettered" about how wonderful he'll make their schools and their bank accounts, and won't worry too much about who's in charge, either.
Sen. Joe Lieberman, D-Conn., the committee's new chairman, promised a series of hearings to examine the federal response to the electricity deregulation and the soaring prices and supply problems in California and other Western states. 
"If we ignore these problems, we put our economy at risk," said Lieberman. 
Prices have gone up so much even one of California's biggest power producers agrees some form of price control is needed to save deregulation. 
"The prices have to be perceived to be as well as actually be fair and reasonable," said Peter Cartwright, CEO of Calpine Corporation. 
The rule, reports CBS News Correspondent Wyatt Andrews , would not be called a price control it would called "price mitigation."
But to Californians who have long protested what they call inaction by FERC, the impact would be the same. 
"This is a way for them to get around the word 'price cap' or 'price-based rate' and call it 'mitigation.'
That's alright with me," said Feinstein.
"I don't much care what they call it as long as they get the job done." 
The Bush administration has strongly opposed such controls. 
In a meeting Tuesday with more than three dozen Republican and Democratic lawmakers from California, Vice President Dick Cheney said the administration remains opposed "to any type of price control legislation," according to those present. 
FERC's proposal, according to sources, is to expand the now limited price mitigation plan to around the clock coverage, and would cover power not just generated in California, but in all 11 states in the Western electric interconnection. 
The impact of around-the-clock mitigation will be dramatic for California consumers.
When the limited plan kicked in over the last two weeks, the $300 wholesale price for power was forced down to $108. 
FERC Chairman Curt Hebert, who has also opposed price controls, calls price mitigation a success. 
"In fact prices came down the very hour the plan went into effect; $190 less than it was the hour before," Hebert says. 
the United States. 
If the vote goes as expected Monday, there is no way politically that FERC will describe this action as an extension of price mitigation, and certainly not as a classic price cap.
But whatever the name, it's intended to end the price gouging Californians have felt for a year, and to mute criticism that FERC itself has been asleep. 
Sen. Jeff Bingaman, D-N.M., chairman of the Energy and Natural Resources Committee, said price limits would be brought up for a Senate vote later this month if FERC doesn't take additional steps to ensure prices are just and reasonable. 
"I hope that FERC will act more aggressively," Bingaman said during an energy forum Tuesday, "and we will not have to have legislation.
" 
The top energy adviser for California Gov. Gray Davis, S. David Freeman, said Tuesday that federal regulators must cap wholesale electricity prices to keep California from "being bled to death" during anticipated power shortages this summer. 
This year California has been paying up to 10 times what it paid for electricity in the pre-crisis period in 1999, with wholesale rates often above $300 a megawatt-hour and natural gas, which run many power plants, three times as costly as in the rest of the country.
Forget that signed photograph of Julia Roberts or 98 Degrees for the moment, or the autographed baseball from New York Yankees star Derek Jeter. 
The anthrax scare has some movie studios, sports teams and record companies holding back the fan mail they receive on behalf of the stars. 
There have even been reports of one Hollywood talent agency refusing to open letters addressed to stars and dumping the missives straight in the garbage. 
No one would admit that Wednesday, but an informal Reuters survey showed there is concern and that precautions are being taken to shield the stars. 
At the Sony studios in Los Angeles, unopened fan mail is piling up on the lot and is going nowhere until the extent of the anthrax scare becomes clearer. 
One studio source told Reuters that Sony was neither opening the mail nor passing it on to the stars.
But neither was it being put in the "return to sender" box. 
Sony was receiving lots of mail addressed to Drew Barrymore, who stars in the hit movie "Riding in Cars with Boys."
Ironically, Barrymore was in New York two weeks ago when anthrax was discovered in the NBC building and she reportedly had to be persuaded to stay in the city for the rest of the week before hosting "Saturday Night Live." 
During her monologue, she made it clear she was not happy being there and her husband Tom Green appeared on the screen jokingly wearing a gas mask during the show. 
Sony also is getting mail for Will Smith, who stars in "Ali" later this year and in "Men in Black II" next year, and the studio has been handling requests from fans for Julia Roberts, who appeared in this year's "America's Sweethearts." 
A spokeswoman at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Inc. in Santa Monica said the James Bond studio was still passing on mail to the star's publicist or agent. "
(But) Everything is scanned beforehand, we are very diligent about security," she said. 
The studio, which features the movie "Bandits" with Bruce Willis and Billy Bob Thornton, said it has hired extra security staff with training to handle suspicious packages before passing them on to the likes of 007 actor Pierce Brosnan. 
Asked if Hollywood studios were destroying mail sent by fans, the MGM spokeswoman said: "They may have started doing that, but I have not heard of it." 
PMK/HBH, the huge Hollywood agency that handles Billy Crystal and Johnny Depp among others, said it is negotiating with its clients to see how they want their fan mail handled. 
"Some clients have chosen not to have it sent to them directly," said Tracy Shaffer, a managing director of the agency.
"We are exploring with clients now trying to find out the best way to handle this." 
She said she had heard reports of fan mail being dumped, but "I don't know that to be true." 
Shaffer said normally the agency sends on mail either to the actor or to a mail handling service.
"We are proceeding with caution as we always do, since fan mail comes from unknown entities.
" Staff were now washing their hands after sorting the mail. 
"All actors get strange things from fans -- everything from baked goods to underwear.
" she said. 
Universal Records in New York gets sacks of mail every week for recording artists like 98 Degrees, Elton John and Godsmack. 
An employee said the company was taking extra precautions in the mailroom and was holding back anything that looked suspicious. 
Even the World Series-bound New York Yankees were not immune to the anthrax scare. 
"All I can say is that we are holding all fan mail.
It is not being distributed to the players," said spokesman Rick Cerone.
"Normally it would be put in their lockers, but not now." 
For the time being, letters from kids asking for autographed baseball cards or from dads inviting players to their son's birthday party or bar mitzvah will be piling up at Yankee Stadium in the Bronx. 
By Steve James
On Thursday, Oct. 11, the third season of "Survivor" will premiere.
This edition is set in the wilds of Kenya.
CBS News Correspondent Tracy Smith had a chance to go to Africa and see what was happening for herself. 
Even if you ignore all the hype surrounding the production, she says, Africa can be an incredibly dangerous place to visit.
The game takes place in Kenya - a country that shares a border with nations hostile to the United States - like Sudan and Somalia.
But contestants had a lot more than that to worry about. 
Kenya has a pretty rugged terrain; just getting to the "Survivor: Africa" camp is an adventure.
The best way in is by air - usually a single-engine plane landing on a dirt road, followed by a long truck ride.
Security is tight; armed guards watch the gate. 
Long before the "Survivor" contestants, or any humans at all, showed up there, the area was home to thousands of animals: elephants, lions, and other big cats like leopard and cheetah.
The crew is committed to protecting the natural habitat, but before the cameras rolled, protesters tried to have the show stopped to protect the animals. 
They worried that some species would be pushed out of their natural habitat by all of the TV shooting.
That does happen.
Just recently, a cheetah and its brother were abandoned by their mother when ranchers came into their territory.
Now, they're in an animal orphanage. 
But the most endangered animals there could be the two-legged kind.
Contestants have almost no protection from the elements. 
They'll be hungry, but this time around, can't hunt animals for food.
They'll be dying of thirst, but they can't even take so much as a sip from the river, infested with man-eating crocodiles.
In fact, there are so many dangers in the river that the producers couldn't make it safe.
So there's a new rule for "Survivor: Africa" that no contestants are allowed in the water - or even near it. 
So, if the 16 survivors can find water and keep from being eaten by crocodiles, mauled by lions, or trampled by elephants, then they'll survive - at least until they come to the tribal council. 
There will be flames all around the tribal council set, because in Africa, fire means life.
As in the two shows that preceded it, the tribal council in this "Survivor" will be the place where fates are decided, votes are cast, alliances are broken, and million-dollar dreams are dashed. 
As for the cast, it is said that the first "Survivor" had the better personalities, but the second had better bodies.
And the third? 
"It's a combination," said executive producer Mark Burnett.
"The third cast understand the game very well, are very vocal, and conflicts and tribal politics happened immediately.
There was no 'nice-nice' fakeness around it.
It was like they got right into '
All right, this is the way it is,'" he said. 
"Right now, on Survivor 3, we have the most incredible dynamic cast, and absolutely the best first episode we've ever had," he added.
The Russell Senate office building reopened Wednesday morning, the first of Congress' six main office buildings to unlock its doors since last week's anthrax incident. 
Thirty-four senators were able to return to their offices, but 66 others, and all the members of the House, continue to work out of makeshift offices. 
Even so, worries remain that the anthrax-laced letter sent to Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle's office last week was not the only one that arrived on Capitol Hill.
Those concerns were sparked by anthrax discoveries at a House mailroom and a U.S. Postal Service facility in town. 
"I would use as my working hypothesis that it's not the Daschle letter that caused everything we've seen to date," said Sen. Bill Frist, R-Tenn.
, a doctor who has been closely involved in Capitol Hill's response to its first bioterrorism attack. 
"I think we have to assume there is a possibility that other mail could be contaminated," said Daschle, D-S.D. 
No mail has been delivered to congressional offices since Daschle's letter arrived on Oct. 15.
It is not known when deliveries will resume. 
Anthrax was discovered during the weekend on a machine that bundles mail for the Longworth House office building, creating suspicions that mail somewhere in the facility contains the bacteria.
No such letter or parcel and no traces of anthrax have yet been found in Longworth, which like Congress' other office buildings has been closed since last week. 
All of Longworth's mail and some of Daschle's may be burned as a precaution, officials said. 
More tests throughout the Capitol complex revealed no new areas where the potentially deadly bacteria have been found.
In addition, tests were completed on more than 5,000 congressional workers and others and the figure for those exposed to anthrax remained steady at 28, said Capitol Police Lt. Dan Nichols. 
Click here for a closer look at the Bush presidency. 
Click here for a look at the 107th U.S. Congress. 
Daschle said authorities hoped to finish cleaning an anthrax-contaminated mailroom in the Dirksen Senate office building and reopen that building by Friday or Monday.
Parts of the Hart Senate office building, where Daschle's office is, may begin reopening next week, he said. 
Cleaning contaminated areas could involve the use of noxious gases, bleach or other techniques.
Daschle and others have said it could take weeks to completely reopen the Hart building. 
House leaders did not reopen any of their buildings Wednesday because they said test results were not complete.
They hoped to reopen at least one building Thursday. 
Two sources, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the decision to reopen Russell overruled an initial recommendation from scientists and health officials who wanted it to remain closed while nearby buildings were cleaned. 
The House and Senate held sessions Tuesday, their first since 28 Daschle aides and other workers were found to have anthrax exposure.
The House recessed last Wednesday and the Senate on Thursday. 
Their office buildings shuttered, members of Congress and their staffs are struggling to find places to work.
Many aides worked from home, others from private offices, and some were given the day off. 
CBS News Correspondent Bob Fuss reports the most creative solution may be that of New York Democrat Gary Ackerman, who parked his station wagon on the Capitol plaza, set up a card table and some chairs and put up a sign, saying "Congressman Ackerman's Office."
Nicaragua's leftist Sandinista leader Daniel Ortega conceded defeat Monday in presidential elections he had hoped would return him to power 11 years after his revolutionary government was voted out of office. 
"We will respect the people's mandate," Ortega said, adding that the elections had been "extraordinary" with "a massive and exemplary turnout." 
Opinion polls had shown Ortega running neck and neck with conservative ruling party candidate Enrique Bolanos going into Sunday's election and there were concerns that a slow vote and a tight race could cause tensions, or even post-election violence. 
But Ortega said he fully accepted the vote returns that had him trailing Bolanos by several percentage points. 
Ortega swept to power in a 1979 revolution and his socialist government then fought U.S.-backed Contra rebels in a bitter civil war that killed some 30,000 people in the 1980s. 
He was ousted from office in 1990 elections and lost again six years later, but he kept control of his Sandinista party and, with the country in economic crisis, opinion polls had showed him running neck and neck with Bolanos going into Sunday's election. 
But the results indicated that Ortega failed to convince voters of his transformation from a Marxist revolutionary to a free market believer. 
The turnout was so great that election officials said some voters were still queued up to cast ballots at 11:30 p.m. Sunday 5 hours after the lines to vote were closed nationwide. 
"I was struck by the fact that in nearly every single village we could see long lines of people who were waiting to vote," said U.S. Rep. David Dreier, a California Republican who was part of a congressional observation group that toured the country by helicopter. 
Former U.S. President Jimmy Carter was among thousands of local and foreign poll watchers scattered across the nation of 5 million people to monitor what was expected to be a tight and tense election. 
Once a socialist revolutionary who wore olive-green uniforms as president, Ortega sought to soften his image, campaigning in pink shirts and with the slogan "the path of love." 
His earlier governments followed socialist policies, confiscating property, jailing opponents and drafting tens of thousands of youths to fight U.S.-backed rebels while trying to bring jobs and food for all. 
Ortega has vowed to follow market-based policies and to seek good relations with the United States.
He said his government would include several people who had been jailed by the Sandinista government of the 1980s.
But U.S. officials openly tilted against him, expressing concern about his party's past ties to terrorists and its past socialist policies. 
The Liberals' Bolanos, 73, is a former vice president who saw most of his businesses confiscated during the Sandinista era. 
Bolanos promised to continue the free-market policies of outgoing President Arnoldo Aleman, but with a greater emphasis on fighting corruption.
Allegations of shady dealings stained the reputation of the outgoing government.
SEN.
JOHN MCCAIN, R-AZ:
Well, my comment is, I understand why the secretary would say that.
I also think that it's not necessary.
In other words, I think we should note that we have weapons now, precision weapons, and of the kind that would probably address this kind of a threat, which is specific small groups of people in remote places, without having to use nuclear weapons. 
And, very frankly, nuclear weapons have a connotation associated with them that, it seems to me, that, if you can't rule it out, you should certainly say that it is highly unlikely that this requirement would ever arise. 
BORGER: Senator, he also seemed not to rule out eventually going after Iraq as part of this anti-terrorism plan.
Do you believe we ought to do that? 
MCCAIN:
As we all know from published media reports, there was some debate within the administration as to who the targets would be and the priorities.
I think it's pretty well-known that now we've established priorities, and
Afghanistan, I think very appropriately, is the first priority. 
Then I think it would be dictated by the behavior of these other countries, to a large degree.
If they're willing to, as the president strongly admonished, willing to harbor terrorists, then obviously, they're going to be open to some kinds of retaliation - economic, diplomatic and perhaps military. 
But I think, first, you take care of the Afghanistan situation, and then you move on to other areas depending on what happens in those countries. 
SCHIEFFER:
Can we, as a practical matter, do this, Senator McCain?
You are a former military man.
You've been to Vietnam.
Boy, have you been to Vietnam.
But this is going to be a very difficult assignment.
Is it beyond the capabilities of this country? 
MCCAIN: I don't think so.
In fact, I'm absolutely convinced it's within the capabilities of this country. 
I think the president inspired the nation with his address to Congress, and I think that his fundamental point here, patience and time, time and patience, and that's going to be our challenge as a nation.
Six months from now, a year from now, maybe two years from now, we have to have the same resolve and the same kind of tenacity and commitment that we have today.
And that's where I think the president's message is so important. 
BORGER:
But from a military standpoint, does it worry you that we could get bogged down in Afghanistan in the same way, say, that we did in Vietnam? 
MCCAIN: I don't think we will.
I think we have the strongest national security team that has ever been assembled.
I think that we've learned the lessons from previous conflicts.
I think that we have a steady hand at the tiller. 
I don't know anyone who contemplates occupying Afghanistan, but we do have tremendously increased capabilities, such as the Delta Force, the Rangers, the SEALs and others, to carry out operations. 
And one reason why I am so pleased to see the Pakistani ambassador make the comments that she has made, Pakistan is a key element, a very key element.
Uzbekistan and Tajikistan are important countries, but the stability in those countries is - they're far more difficult in many ways to handle and move through than Pakistan is. 
So I'm convinced we can do it.
I'm convinced we have the capabilities.
We will now be spending more money on defense, and so I'm optimistic. 
But I don't think it's going to happen tomorrow.
I think the worst thing we could do is launch some cruise missiles and have it look real good on the evening news, and then move on.
And this president isn't going too
do that. 
SCHIEFFER:
Let me shift to the economy, because you were one of the leaders on Capitol Hill in bailing out the airlines.
And I think everyone agrees with the necessity of that. 
Let me ask you about something else, and that is National Airport.
Do you envision that National Airport here in the nation's capital, Reagan National Airport, will ever be reopened? 
MCCAIN: I would love to have it be reopened, but I would leave that up to the national security experts.
Those are the people who know.
We members of Congress don't have the knowledge.
I'd love to see it open tomorrow, but I will support and respect whatever decision is made regarding National Airport. 
As regards the economy, I think we've got to spend some money, and I say that as a proud fiscal conservative.
We need to spend money, and I think we need to spend it quickly and pump some money into this economy. 
SCHIEFFER:
So how do you do that? 
MCCAIN:
I think we can do it by accelerating some of the pending expenditures.
I think we can spend additional monies in a broad variety of ways, including infrastructure, some of which has lagged already.
And not worry too much at this particular moment in time about the deficit.
And I say that again, as a proud fiscal conservative.
But I believe we need to get some money, and I think that money will breed some confidence in the future of the economy. 
BORGER:
Tom Ridge, governor of Pennsylvania, is going to take over this new office of homeland security, as we're calling it.
Do you believe he has enough authority to do what he needs to do? 
MCCAIN: I do not.
I think that Tom Ridge has got to be given the authority to give and call up the director of the FBI or any other agency that's on his purview and say, "Do this," not ask, request.
The thing in this town that people understand is authority, and that, I believe, must be given to Tom Ridge.
And if it's going to be a Cabinet-level job, let's approve it through the United States Senate and make it a Cabinet-level job.
But give him the authority over these various agencies. 
I admire the drug czar, I admire everybody who's been a drug czar.
But the drug czar has not been as effective as the czar should have been because he didn't have the ability to give orders, only requests. 
SCHIEFFER:
All right, John McCain, thank you so much. 
MCCAIN:
Thank you. 
SCHIEFFER:
We'll be back in just a moment. 
SCHIEFFER:
And we're back now with our expanded edition of Face the Nation.
We're going to be talking to Senators John Kerry and Bob Graham in just a minute. 
But before we do that, we want to go first to CBS News correspondent Allen Pizzey, who is in Islamabad, Pakistan. 
Well, Allen, what's the situation there today? 
ALLEN PIZZEY, CBS NEWS:
Well, good evening, Bob. 
Well, the only bit of news out of here is what you mentioned earlier, that the Taliban says they can't find Osama bin Laden anymore, surprise, surprise. 
The other thing we know is that an advanced security team from the United States is on its way in here this week.
They may have arrived already, to set up security for a U.S. delegation that's coming to talk to Pakistan about what Pakistan can do, how they can help. 
The Pakistani ambassador said that Pakistan did not know where bin Laden was.
That may be a little diplomatic.
There's a widespread feeling here that the Pakistanis know an awful lot, which is why the Americans want to talk to them.
Pakistani intelligence has been deeply involved with the Taliban.
They may not know which cave he's hiding in, but they've probably got a pretty good idea, more or less, where he is. 
But the important thing is that Pakistan is going to get a lot of money from the United States, because there is some opposition to Pakistan going along with the U.S. here. 
There have been demonstrations across many of the cities here.
They're small, they're contained, but they do represent an important element in this story.
And that's the fundamentalist element.
Deep-seated belief among Muslims that America is not necessarily on their side. 
Pakistan I think you might want to look as a microcosm of the kind of problems and the kind of issues that America is going to have to face and address as they build this coalition and then go into action. 
They're going to have to have all the Muslim countries on their side, and Muslims do not see America as their best friend.
There have been a few faux pas's, for example, calling it a "crusade."
The name they chose was - for the operation was offensive.
That's all been changed. 
But America has to do an awful lot, because Muslims look at America's Middle East policy, they say, "You're anti-Muslim, you are pro-Israel."
And I think what happens in Israel, the way the U.S. addresses issues that concern Muslims worldwide will have a lot to do with how well they can build this coalition, Bob. 
SCHIEFFER:
All right, thank you very much, Allen.
Thank you very much. 
Well, with us now to talk about all of this, Senator John Kerry.
Senator Kerry something of an expert on terrorism himself.
He has actually written a book about it. 
And Senator Bob Graham, who is of course the chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee. 
Senator Graham, let me just begin with you.
There has now been report after report that the FBI, the CIA knew that there were followers of Osama bin Laden trying to get into flight schools, trying to take flight training, where they said, "We don't need to know how to take off and land an airplane
, we just need to know how to steer one."
These reports keep going around. 
What happened here?
Why was not some action taken on this? 
FL:
Bob, I think what we're seeing here is one of several weaknesses in our intelligence system, starting with the fact that we've had inadequate coordination, too much fragmentation, too much turf protection among the agencies that Americans have a right to expect are going to be working together. 
I believe that the proposal that the president announced on Thursday night of establishing a new office of homeland defense and asking Governor Ridge to be in charge of it is a very good first step. 
As Senator McCain said, we need to back that up by making it a statutory office, and give it some of the capabilities that that office, even under as strong a person as Governor Ridge, is going to need to knock heads, and be sure that we don't have repetitions of what happened in this tragic incident. 
SCHIEFFER:
Well, Senator Kerry, are you as concerned about these reports as others seem to be?
I mean, should - I always hesitate to criticize people in this position, because so many times our investigators, our intelligence agencies, we don't know about their successes.
We only know about their failures.
But this does not seem to--this just doesn't seem quite right here. 
MA: Well, Bob, it's not quite right.
Look, in this war, first of all, everybody has to understand, I'm almost wary of the rhetoric of war with respect to what we have to do here because it raises expectations that can't necessarily be met. 
This is not like any war we have ever fought.
It is hopefully different even - it's somewhat similar to the war on drugs, but we hope it's different because the outcome, many people know, has not been what we want.
But it's that kind of very prolonged, all-points, all-fronts effort. 
And the tragedy is at the moment that the single most important weapon for the United States of America is intelligence.
It's the single most important weapon in this particular war, unlike other wars where it was overwhelming force or air force or something.
And we are weakest, frankly, in that particular area.
So, it's going to take us time to be able to build up here to do this properly. 
I think the most important thing for Americans right now, and I'm sorry this is a switch on you a little bit, but the first front of this war is here at home, our economy.
It really is.
To sustain people's good will, to sustain the energy towards this, to have the resources to fight it, we've got to get the economy moving. 
And that means an unprecedented effort in the next days to face up to what was happening not just since September 11, but before September 11.
We now have a huge number of new unemployed, people who were working in average jobs across this country who are going to be without health insurance, without an income.
We've got to get money back into the economy, and we've got to do it rapidly. 
BORGER:
Well, but Alan Greenspan cautioned this week to go slow on any kind of additional stimulus package. 
KERRY:
I love Alan Greenspan .
We all respect him and even revere him.
But I disagree with Alan Greenspan on this particular timing issue, as do many of our colleagues. 
BORGER:
So what would you do?
What would you do right away? 
KERRY:
I think we have to pump money that's in the system out as rapidly as possible.
I think we have to put additional effort in place for unemployment insurance for extended health benefits.
I think we have to have a stimulus package immediately that accelerates certain kinds of investment projects, whether it's railroad, road, airports, even something as prosaic as a sewer overflow, for mayors all across the country.
There are many things that we can do to put people to work and to restore confidence in the economy. 
SCHIEFFER:
Speaking of money - and I think the point you make is very strong.
We heard John McCain, who said look, I'm a proud conservative just a minute ago and a proud fiscal conservative.
But he said, this is not a time to talk about the deficit. 
I want to ask you on another subject of money, Senator Graham, why is the money of Osama bin Laden so difficult for us to trace?
Can we trace it?
And how can we cut him off from his money? 
GRAHAM:
That is going to be one of the keys to winning this war against terrorism.
We've been trying for the last three or four years to develop a system to trace his money and, frankly, haven't had very much success because he uses nonconventional sources. 
We also have been somewhat ambivalent about this.
You may recall it wasn't very long ago that our secretary of the Treasury was saying, we shouldn't join our European allies in an aggressive effort to clamp down on these shadowy, offshore banks where a lot of hot money is distributed.
Clearly, that's not going to be the position of the administration anymore in light of what happened on September 11. 
We're going to have to join with our allies, our economic allies, to do everything we can to find out and to cut off the flow of the very large avalanche of money that is being directed by terrorists. 
BORGER:
Well, beyond freezing assets, though, Senator, what can you do?
Can you tell foreign banks, "Know your customer"? 
KERRY:
Well, that's the international banking standard.
We've been trying to apply that for years.
There are several things. 
Look, Osama bin Laden's money moves in three ways.
Number one, a system called halawa , which is a very informal exchange system which doesn't cross international lines.
There's very little accountability.
Secondly, through something called Islamic charities, and that is something we can clamp down on.
Third, in the Middle East banking system, they have ignored the standards of transparency and accountability. 
We have to shut down the ease with which money moves in what is known to be suspect ways by leading banks of the world.
They've got to be willing to join in this fight, and I hope the president will join in that effort very, very soon. 
SCHIEFFER:
Senator Graham, let me ask you, you've been briefed by the intelligence communities.
What is the next step?
What should we look for next? 
GRAHAM:
Well, we've got a difficult and somewhat conflicting set of goals that we have to proceed on now. 
One, as Senator Kerry just said, we've got to get back to some sense of normalcy here in our personal lives, as well as in our economic lives. 
On the other hand, we have to stay alert.
There is good evidence that what happened on September 11, that tragedy, was not the only act that was planned, that there were other acts of terrorism, part of the same set of scheduled events.
And there have been... 
SCHIEFFER:
The same kinds of attacks? 
GRAHAM:
That's unlikely that it would be the same type, that is, hijacking of airplanes.
That's what makes it so frightening.
The different forms that such an attack might take. 
BORGER
: Are you talking about chemical and biological? 
GRAHAM:
I know you criticized earlier about the phrase "taking nothing off the table," but I don't think we could take the possibility of those off the table. 
We know what happened in Tokyo not too long ago when a terrorist group gassed a subway station.
Those are all the types of threats that we face. 
What we've got to have is a defense system that is capable of identifying and interdicting whatever form the terrorism might take.
And that's why intelligence is such an absolutely critical component of our war against terrorism. 
BORGER
: Do we have any information that chemical and biological attacks were part of this?
We got news this morning about the crop dusting manuals. 
GRAHAM:
No, no, at least I don't, and not to my knowledge do any of my colleagues. 
But it is something that we know.
For instance, Saddam Hussein has used weapons of mass destruction against his own people.
And there is some evidence of their efforts to try to secure these kinds of weapons and even test them. 
That's why it's so vital that we get the global community to be part of this effort to begin to make their lives miserable. 
But at the same time, and I can't emphasize this strongly enough, we Americans are proud and strong, and we have to prove to the world, and particularly to terrorists, that they have not shut off our way of life, they have not slowed us down in this country. 
People, if you want to do an act of patriotism, if you were going to buy a car, go out and buy that car.
If you were going to do some trip, go do that trip.
It is safer to fly today in the United States than it has been in a long time, and it will get safer by the day because of the things that we are doing. 
People need to have confidence in this country.
And I believe there is less threat of an imminent act of terrorism tomorrow than the many other ways that you could face harm just through the course of life. 
SCHIEFFER:
All right. 
GRAHAM
: Americans must get on with the business of being America. 
SCHIEFFER:
All right.
We're going to leave it at that.
Thank you so much, both of you. 
We're going to continue our expanded coverage on Face the Nation after this short break. 
- more -
American Red Cross blood processing centers have repeatedly failed federal inspections over the last 15 years and continue to have problems that present a "potential for harm" to patients, federal officials said Friday. 
"The Red Cross (blood operation) is not in compliance with the current laws and regulations," said Dr. Jay S. Epstein of the Food and Drug Administration .
"The problems are serious because of the potential for harm" to patients receiving the blood. 
Documents filed by the FDA in the U.S. District Court in Washington said the Red Cross has "a long-standing and ongoing failure to comply with good manufacturing practice" standards in collecting, processing and distributing blood used in medical procedures. 
The FDA said the Red Cross "has not been in compliance with the CGMP provisions ... since at least 1985," and that increasingly tough actions by the FDA have failed to correct the problems.
CGMP stands for current good manufacturing practices, an FDA quality standard. 
Dr. Bernadine Healy, the American Red Cross president and chief executive, said the blood supplied by the organization is "the safest in the world." 
"We are not releasing dangerous blood, but there have been near misses," Healy said.
"These are red flags and we are jumping on them." 
The FDA, in its court filings, said the Red Cross failed FDA inspections in 1985.
After repeated notifications of noncompliance, the Red Cross in 1988 entered into an agreement with the FDA to follow a plan to meet agency standards. 
The problems continued and the FDA sent three notices threatening to revoke establishment licenses.
Eventually the license of one Red Cross center was revoked. 
"When even these measures did not spur (the Red Cross) to meaningful action, FDA negotiated" a 1993 court decree that required better controls and a quality assurance program, the court papers said.
Since 1993, the FDA said, it has sent 10 letters warning the Red Cross of noncompliance with blood center regulations. 
An FDA inspection in July found 25 violations in an Atlanta Red Cross center.
A similar inspection of the Red Cross headquarters in Washington found 63 violations. 
The violations included an improper release of blood products that tested positive for the cytomegalovirus and failure to follow procedures in a second HIV test of blood that had been rejected because it tested positive for the AIDS virus in an initial test.
The HIV-suspected blood was never distributed and the cytomegalovirus-positive blood was not used by patients, a Red Cross official said. 
The "current violations are of deep concern to FDA because of the impact they may have on the safety of the nation's blood supply," said the FDA court filing. 
Epstein said the FDA officials have been in discussion with Red Cross officials about possible fines to force the Red Cross to comply. 
Such fines, said Epstein, "are an appropriate step to provide increased incentives to bring the Red Cross into compliance." 
Following the discussion, the Red Cross filed papers in the District Court to block the fines and ask that the court order mediation of the FDA compliance enforcement efforts.
In a response, the FDA told the court that it "does not believe mediation would be productive." 
The increasingly severe actions of the FDA came to light after Dr. Sidney M. Wolfe, director of Public Citizen's Health Research Group, released copies of a letter he sent to Dr. Jane Henney, commissioner of FDA, asking that the agency "stop playing dangerous, cooperative, polite games with the (Red Cross) and ask that the organization be held in contempt of court" for not complying with the 1993 consent decree. 
"Unless the FDA exercises this legal responsibility, there is little evidence that the (Red Cross) will come into compliance with the terms of the (court decree) or with U.S. laws and regulations concerning blood and blood products," Wolfe said in a statement. 
Healy, who became head of the American Red Cross last year, said the organization took out a $300 million loan in 1991 to build and equip laboratories and to improve the management of the blood supply system. 
She said one blood processing center, in Puerto Rico, has been closed and 36 other centers are being upgraded to comply with FDA regulations. 
The Red Cross collects about 6.5 million units of blood annually, about half of the nation's medical blood supply.
AP Macedonia called for a state of war in early May after a rebel attack killed eight soldiers but was dissuaded by Western powers, who argued it would inflame the situation, alienate ethnic Albanians and complicate the search for peace. 
The attacks marked an escalation in Macedonia's months-long conflict between government forces and ethnic Albanian militants, who say they are fighting for broader rights for their community. 
The insurgency erupted in February, claiming the lives of more than a dozen government troops and at least as many rebels. 
The government, dominated by the majority Slavs, regards the rebels as terrorists bent on seizing control of a large piece of Macedonian territory and merging it with neighboring Albania and the adjacent Kosovo province in southern Yugoslavia. 
The other major battle zone, northeast of the capital, Skopje, also was tense, with occasional gun fire exchange.
Resisting a series of government offensives, the rebels remain entrenched there in a cluster of ethnic Albanian villages, together with a few thousand civilians. 
The largest city in the northeast, Kumanovo, which is controlled by the government, has suffered from acute water shortages because rebels control a reservoir that supplies the city with drinking water. 
Macedonian authorities have threatened to wipe out the rebels and end the insurgency, which many fear could spread to other Balkan regions. 
Ethnic Albanians make up about one-third of the population in this country of 2 million. 
Macedonian state radio reported three of the dead soldiers were from the southwestern town of Bitola.
When several soldiers from that town died in clashes last month, riots erupted in Bitola, with Slavic residents damaging the shops and homes of local ethnic Albanians. 
U.S. Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld visited Macedonia on Tuesday, talking to his counterpart, Vlado Buckovski, who appealed for the United States to help stem the influx of money and weapons sent by ethnic Albanian ?
migr?s from the West to the rebel movement here. 
The government also requested U.S. assistance in training Macedonian army commando units. 
The United States and its allies have condemned the violence in Macedonia and urged the Slav-led government and ethnic Albanian leaders to work out their differences peacefully.
Five days into the Bush presidency and the Democratic gloves have come off.
No, they aren't attacking Bush.
These are Democrats.
They're fighting with each other. 
Wednesday in Washington, the Democratic Leadership Council, the centrist branch of the Democratic Party, hosted a panel discussion titled Why Gore Lost and What's Next for Democrats.
The centerpiece of the panel was a survey done in November by Mark Penn, pollster for the DLC and both Clintons.
The poll showed, to nobody's great surprise, that Al Gore lost the election because he abandoned many of the "new Democrat themes of the DLC" and failed to stress and get credit for the economic success of the Clinton years. 
The group's chairman
Al From made the point in the DLC magazine Blueprint . "
The vice president's strategic decision to run at arms length from the Clinton-Gore record was costly.
An astonishing 65 percent of voters said the country was on the right track, but Al Gore won just 61 percent of them." 
Adding spice to the forum were Steve Rosenthal, political director of the AFL-CIO, and Ruy Teixeira, senior fellow of the Century Foundation, who made the populist argument of the Gore campaign, pinning blame for the loss on Clinton fatigue and Gore's poor performance as a candidate. 
The argument between groups representing the Democratic "base" (African Americans, union members, feminists, liberals and urban voters) versus the "new Democrats" (more upscale, suburban, white and male) has been central in the party for the last 30 years. 
The DLC, once dubbed the Democratic Leisure Class by the Rev. Jesse Jackson, was formed in the early '80s to give moderates and Southerners a voice in a party they felt was dominated by the left.
Bill Clinton latched onto the group as a way to mask his McGovernite roots, and used the DLC structure and think tank to build his successful campaign in 1992.
Ironically, Al Gore and his policy advisors have more authentic DLC credentials than Clinton, which is why the DLC was particularly pained at the way his presidential messages were shaped. 
The main thrust of the Penn poll and the DLC argument is that given the economic boom of the Clinton years, Al Gore should have won the election hands down.
He lost, the argument goes, because he resorted to the old populist themes used in the '80s by Walter Mondale and Michael Dukakis. 
The DLC contends that Democrats need to expand beyond their traditional base to the wired workers of the information age; that populist arguments are read by the public as too liberal and too favorable to big government; and that the themes of progress and prosperity are more powerful than that of class warfare. 
The poll also showed the startling differences in voting behavior between upscale men and women.
Women were given a clear reason to vote for Gore on the abortion issue.
Upscale males were given no similarly powerful argument by Gore and viewed Bush as more favorable on their issues, especially small government and lower taxes. 
The AFL-CIO s Rosenthal began his defense of the Gore campaign by contending that "Al Gore didn't lose the election," and that the combined votes of Gore and Nader represented a progressive majority in the Untied States.
He cited data by ex-DLC and Clinton pollster Stan Greenberg (who worked this time for Gore) showing the positive effects of Gore's "fighting for working families" message in driving up the turnout of union voters and African Americans, and he pointed out that prosperity did not hit everyone.
Rosenthal also attacked the poll for ignoring the issue of Clinton fatigue, as well as Gore's weakness in the debates and as a candidate. 
Ruy Texiera put it more bluntly: "The winning formula for the Democrats is not DLC or barbarism.
" It is a theme that blends both sets of arguments, that updates and enhances messages that worked in the 1930s (economic security) and the 1960s (social change); not one that trashes those messages and disses the base. 
Rosenthal pointed out that the Republicans had dropped the Gingrich agenda as a campaign issue and that, in fact, Bush co-opted a number of Democratic core issues, like social security and education. 
Both sides claimed to be happy that a dialogue had begun, but conceded that this fight would probably not be resolved for many elections to come.
And beyond themes, both sides know that the candidate's political skills matter.
Rosenthal quoted a union member saying, "Next time, we need to ask candidates, 'Can you hang?'
" Not on a noose, but on the street corner.
Bill Clinton and George Bush knew how.
Al Gore, for all his smarts, just couldn't hang. 
MMI Viacom Internet Services Inc.
All Rights Reserved.
The Bush administration says it is "disappointed" by a federal judge's decision to temporarily halt the president's plan to give drug discount cards to elderly Americans, arguing the move will delay efforts to provide "immediate and necessary relief to the millions of Americans who are forced to pay full price for their prescription drugs.
" 
White House press secretary Ari Fleischer said Friday that the ruling "is harmful to out nation's seniors, and the President is committed to helping seniors get prescription drugs, and wants to do so quickly and directly." 
Late Thursday, a federal judge granted a request from the National Association of Chain Drug Stores for a preliminary injunction, temporarily stopping the program, according to a spokesman for the Health and Human Services department. 
"We are working with the Department of Justice to consider all our legal options," said Tom Scully, administrator for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, in a statement.
"Our goal remains to provide discounts to millions of seniors as soon as possible." 
In July, President Bush announced a plan to give all senior Medicare beneficiaries a new discount card, which would make for discounts of about 15 to 30 percent on their prescriptions. 
Companies managing the cards would negotiate lower prices with drug manufacturers, and seniors would pay a one-time maximum fee of about $25.
The plan, which was supposed to be up and running by January, would not need congressional approval. 
Scully said his agency received 28 applications from companies so far to take part in the program. 
"A Medicare-endorsed prescription drug card would give significant discounts to seniors and disabled Americans that are available to most other Americans now," said Scully.
"It is a shame that most seniors are still paying full retail prices for prescription drugs." 
Scully said the administration would work on all "judicial and legislative alternatives to provide immediate relief on drug prices," and said the federal court's decision "intensifies" the need for Congress to take up Bush's Medicare reform proposals, including providing a prescription drug benefit to seniors. 
When Bush unveiled his discount card plan, many Democrats said groups such as the American Association for Retired Persons already offered discount cards to their members, and said what was really needed was legislation giving prescription coverage to the nation's seniors. 
NATO defence ministers Wednesday pledged "unflinching support" for the U.S. campaign against terrorism. 
After a briefing by U.S. Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz, they reiterated a commitment to a "long, arduous" campaign in response to the U.S. hijack attacks. 
NATO Secretary-General George Robertson said the U.S. made no specific requests at the meeting but added that the ministers were ready to give the U.S. their support. 
Asked if Wolfowitz provided proof that suspected terrorist Osama bin Laden was behind the attacks, Robertson said: "It is not necessary for an ally to produce evidence." 
However, he said evidence was continuing to build and there was "no surprise" where it was pointing. 
Wolfowitz is standing in for his boss Donald Rumsfeld, who is staying in Washington to help formulate the United States' response to the terrorist attacks. 
NATO has said in the immediate aftermath of the hijackings that it would stand ready to help the United States "if it is determined that this attack was directed from abroad." 
Asked if the word "if" was being removed from that declaration, Robertson said the U.S. had not asked that the "if" be dropped, but he expected that request to come soon. 
Meanwhile, Italian Foreign Minister Renato Ruggiero visited New York on Wednesday, and at a news conference with Mayor Rudy Giuliani, he pledged his country's "full solidarity" with New York and the United States. 
"We want to go beyond just words," he said.
"The Italian government is ready to participate in every action that would be considered necessary to fighting international terrorism by the NATO alliance." 
Italy's commitment, he said, includes participating in any NATO military operation. 
"This has been a crime against humanity," Ruggiero said.
"I'm sure that we will all recover, and we will win."
The paramilitary Irish Republican Army has issued a statement saying it is starting to decommission its weapons. 
The announcement came almost exactly 24 hours after the republican Sinn Fein party -- which is closely associated to the IRA -- urged them to make a groundbreaking move and begin disarming. 
The IRA statement released on Tuesday said: "This unprecedented move is to save the peace process." 
The move was confirmed in a statement from the head of the disarmament commission, General John de Chastelain, who said: "A quantity of arms have been put beyond use.
It includes arms, ammunitions, and explosives." 
UK Prime Minister Tony Blair called the announcement a "move of fundamental significance." 
He said: "Whatever the setbacks, whatever the strains of constant bargaining this is a peace process that is working. 
"All paramilitary organisations should follow suit.
There will be dangers from those who do not want change but they should realise they have absolutely no support in the wider community." 
Decommissioning of paramilitary weapons has become a key sticking point in the Northern Ireland peace process. 
Loyalists say the IRA has not done enough to disarm but republican and nationalist parties say the group has made big steps towards putting its weapons beyond use and co-operated with the international body overseeing decommissioning -- a cornerstone of the Good Friday peace accord that created Northern Ireland's coalition government. 
In its statement the IRA insisted that decommissioning was not part of the Good Friday accord but said unionists and sections of the British establishment had tied disarming to the peace process in an attempt to prevent change. 
The statement read: "At every opportunity they have used the issue of arms as an excuse to undermine and frustrate progress. 
"It is for this reason that decommissioning was introduced to the process by the British Government.
It has been used since to prevent the changes that a lasting peace requires." 
The IRA statement ended: "No one should doubt the difficulties these initiatives cause for us, our volunteers and our support base. 
"The political process is now on the point of collapse.
Such a collapse would certainly, and eventually, put the overall peace process in jeopardy." 
Sinn Fein national chairman Mitchel McLaughlin told PA that the IRA's move was a "very significant" development which needed a positive response from other players in the peace process. 
Sinn Fein leader Gerry Adams publicly called on the IRA to begin disarming on Monday -- a plea which received wide praise from across the political spectrum but which was tempered by the need for words to be turned into action. 
The IRA's move comes just two days before UK Northern Ireland Secretary John Reid had to decide whether to suspend Northern Ireland's devolved government. 
Ulster Unionist ministers quit the assembly in protest at the IRA's failure to put its weapons beyond use.
Now they believe the assembly can be rescued. 
Party leader David Trimble said: "The decommissioning body has personally witnessed weapons being put permanently beyond use and permanently unavailable. 
"This is the day we were told we would never happen.
look forward now with confidence to the reconstitution of the administration." 
In May 2000, the IRA, which had given its support to the Good Friday Agreement, said it would not give up any of its weapons but would allow an independent inspection.
The Bush administration says it is "disappointed" by a federal judge's decision to temporarily halt the president's plan to give drug discount cards to elderly Americans, arguing the move will delay efforts to provide "immediate and necessary relief to the millions of Americans who are forced to pay full price for their prescription drugs.
" 
White House press secretary Ari Fleischer said Friday that the ruling "is harmful to out nation's seniors, and the President is committed to helping seniors get prescription drugs, and wants to do so quickly and directly." 
Late Thursday, a federal judge granted a request from the National Association of Chain Drug Stores for a preliminary injunction, temporarily stopping the program, according to a spokesman for the Health and Human Services department. 
"We are working with the Department of Justice to consider all our legal options," said Tom Scully, administrator for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, in a statement.
"Our goal remains to provide discounts to millions of seniors as soon as possible." 
In July, President Bush announced a plan to give all senior Medicare beneficiaries a new discount card, which would make for discounts of about 15 to 30 percent on their prescriptions. 
Companies managing the cards would negotiate lower prices with drug manufacturers, and seniors would pay a one-time maximum fee of about $25.
The plan, which was supposed to be up and running by January, would not need congressional approval. 
Scully said his agency received 28 applications from companies so far to take part in the program. 
"A Medicare-endorsed prescription drug card would give significant discounts to seniors and disabled Americans that are available to most other Americans now," said Scully.
"It is a shame that most seniors are still paying full retail prices for prescription drugs." 
Scully said the administration would work on all "judicial and legislative alternatives to provide immediate relief on drug prices," and said the federal court's decision "intensifies" the need for Congress to take up Bush's Medicare reform proposals, including providing a prescription drug benefit to seniors. 
When Bush unveiled his discount card plan, many Democrats said groups such as the American Association for Retired Persons already offered discount cards to their members, and said what was really needed was legislation giving prescription coverage to the nation's seniors. 
A service in honor of the missing and dead from the September 11 deadly terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center is planned for Sunday afternoon at Yankee Stadium, with prayers being offered from representatives of a wide variety of faiths. 
The service, billed as "Prayer for America," is to be simulcast on large television screens at stadiums in Staten Island and Brooklyn. 
According to a preliminary program that the organizers said is subject to change, the service will begin with an introduction by actor James Earl Jones at 3 p.m. EDT, followed by a welcome from talk-show host Oprah Winfrey. 
The Presentation of Colors will be carried out by Adm. Robert Natter, commander in chief of the Pacific Fleet, with the New York City Inter-Agency Uniformed Color Guard and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey Joint Military Color Guard. 
Police officers Danny Rodriguez and Ann Marie Maloney and Sgt.
Kim Royster then will sing the national anthem. 
Invocations will be made by Cardinal Edward Egan, archbishop of New York, and Rabbi Joseph Potasnik, chaplain of the New York City Fire Department. 
The Blowing of the Shofar then will take place.
The shofar, or ram's horn, is the instrument used to announce major national and religious events in Jewish life. 
Rabbi Arthur Schneier will lead a Prayer for the Country, followed by Rabbi Alvin Kass, the New York City Police Department chaplain, who will lead a Prayer for the Families. 
Rabbi Marc Gellman, president of the New York Board of Rabbis, will read a reflection, and Rabbi Joy Levitt will read Psalm 23. 
They will be followed by Spanish tenor Placido Domingo and the Amor-Artis Chorus & Orchestra, who will sing "Ave Maria." 
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's remarks will be followed by the ringing of the bell by a police officer from the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. 
Griselda Cuevas of the Incarnation Parish in Manhattan will read in Spanish from Romans 8:36-39.
Firefighter George Reece will read the same passage in English. 
The Most Rev. Thomas V. Daily, bishop of Brooklyn, then will offer a reflection and prayer. 
A Sikh prayer and reflection will be offered by Dr. Inberjit Singh of the Sikh Temple in Richmond Hills. 
The Boys and Girls Choir of Harlem will then sing "Lift Every Voice and Sing," followed by remarks from Gov. George Pataki. 
The Adhan Call to Prayer will be made by the Muezzin, Brother Abdul Wali Y. Shaheed, translated by Sister Zaimah Sabree and Masjid Malcolm Shabazz of Harlem. 
Muslim prayer and reflection then will be offered: a prayer by Imam Fajri Ansari, a prayer by Imam Muhammad Shamsi-Ali and a reflection by Imam Izak-EL M. Pasha, a chaplain of the New York Police Department, with Lt. Sharif Nasef and Officer Adil Almonpaser. 
Bette Midler then will sing "Wind Beneath My Wings," followed by the ringing of the bell by the Rev. Earnest Lyght, a bishop. 
The Council of Churches of the City of New York then will offer prayer and reflection. 
The Rev. Carolyn Holloway will read Psalm 34:1-8; the Right Rev. Mark Sisk will read a prayer; the Rev. Dr. James Forbes will read Matthew 5:3-12; Archbishop Anania Arapajian of the Armenian Church in America will say a prayer; the Rev. Calvin Butts, president of the Council of Churches of the City of New York, will offer a reflection; and the Rev. Dr. David Benke will say a prayer. 
Country singer Lee Greenwood will then perform "God Bless the USA." 
Archbishop Demetrious, the Greek Orthodox archbishop of America, will say a benediction as will Pandit Roop Sukhram of the Hindu Sreeraam Temple in Brooklyn. 
The service will conclude with the Amor-Artis Chorus & Orchestra and Rodriguez singing "America the Beautiful." 
Most of the tickets are to be given to family members of the dead and missing as well as to rescue workers, though a limited number will be given to the public on a first-come, first-serve basis. 
"The prayers are for the people missing, the people who have died and for America and for everyone that survived," Giuliani said. 
Security remains a concern.
No bags, backpacks, umbrellas or bottles will be permitted at the stadiums. 
Hungary said on Thursday it would ask the European Parliament to ban serving protected birds as delicacies in Italian restaurants to stop Italian hunters crossing to Hungary to kill them. 
"We've also proposed at the National Customs Authority that all cooler trucks that carry game meat across Hungary's borders be checked very thoroughly," Zoltan Illes, chairman of the Hungarian parliament's environmental committee told a news conference. 
Gabor Toth, head of the committee investigating the issue, called those behind the hunting and smuggling "an international, well-organized Cosa Nostra." 
Last November Hungarian customs officials seized the carcasses of more than ten thousand protected birds in a truck on the Hungarian-Croatian border, heading to EU-member Italy. 
On Wednesday, customs officials caught an Italian smuggling 20 birds into Hungary from Romania in his car. 
"Hungary also seems to be a collecting place for birds smuggled from eastern Europe, mainly from Romania and Serbia, where some birds that are protected in Hungary can be freely hunted," Toth added. 
In an effort to end the killing of rare and protected birds, Hungary plans to set up a nature protection squad. 
Since the mid-1990s Italian hunters have killed and smuggled out of the country tens of thousands of birds -- including larks, blackbirds and turtle-doves. 
The birds are delicacies on Italian restaurant menus. 
The International Wild Animal Protection Council (CIC), which has its headquarters in Hungary, has offered to help detect the "criminal elements" in the hunting community, Dieter Schramm, chairman of the organization, told journalists. 
Hungary, which has closed negotiations on environmental policy with the European Union, expects to join the EU in 2004. 
Copyright 2002 Reuters .
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
U.S. and British warplanes bombed two anti-aircraft artillery sites in Iraq's southern no-fly zone Wednesday, the Defense Department announced. 
Wednesday's strikes, which occurred at about 7 a.m. EDT, follow the bombing of an Iraqi anti-aircraft artillery site Tuesday, also in southern Iraq. 
"Today's coalition strikes in the no-fly zones were executed as self-defense measures in response to Iraqi hostile threats and acts against coalition aircrews and their aircraft and are not related to the President's campaign against terrorism", according to a statement from the United States Central Command, which is in charge of U.S. forces in the region. 
"If Iraq were to cease its threatening actions, coalition strikes would also cease," the statement said. 
In Baghdad, Iraqi military officials, quoted in a report by the state-run Iraqi News Agency, said U.S. and British aircraft attacked civilian targets in the Basra region, killing two civilians and wounding another.
The FBI says it's pursuing almost 150,000 tips and potential leads in its criminal investigation into the coordinated assault that destroyed the World Trade Center and severely damaged the Pentagon, killing thousands of people. 
A key part of solving the puzzle may be box-cutter knives or similar tools found on two flights made successfully, the same day that four United States commercial jets were hijacked and crashed, sources told CNN. 
The hijackers who seized the airliners on September 11 had used box cutters to attack some of the crew and passengers, according to government officials and accounts from passengers in-flight who phoned relatives before their planes crashed. 
A knowledgeable source said two small knives were found on a Delta flight that was supposed to depart Boston, and a box cutter was found on an Atlanta-to-Brussels Delta flight.
These planes didn't take off since all flights were grounded after the hijackings.
The tools were found when the planes were searched. 
Investigators say they aren't sure whether the tools found were intended for some sort of innocent use or whether their owners may have had malicious intent.
But they say the two planes' passenger manifests have been checked.
And investigators increasingly believe that the weapons may have been prepositioned by accomplices for use by others.
As one U.S. official told Time magazine, "These look like inside jobs." 
Charles Miller, a U.S. Justice Department spokesman, told CNN some box cutters were found on other planes besides the four hijacked ones, but he did not provide any details. 
Separately, two men who are now in federal custody were found with box cutters when they were detained in Texas two weeks ago.
The men -- Ayub Ali Khan and Mohammed Jaweed Azmath -- had been on a flight from Newark, New Jersey to San Antonio, Texas that got diverted to St. Louis, Missouri.
They were stopped on an Amtrak train on its way to San Antonio. 
More evidence also has been revealed to explain a warning issued last week by the FBI to crop-duster plane owners and pilots telling them to be on the lookout for suspicious individuals. 
Time magazine -- an AOL Time Warner sister medium to CNN.com -- reports that investigators found a crop-dusting manual during their search of a suspected terrorist hideout. 
"We're right in the middle of our defoliation season of cotton in Georgia right now, and crop-dusters were grounded for about a week," said Rep. Saxby Chambliss.
"Needless to say, they were upset, our farmers were upset, but there was a reason for it.
And you're now seeing what the reason was." 
Time does quote a senior official as saying they do not place "high credibility" on the notion that hijackers were exploring the idea of stealing or renting crop-dusters. 
Hoping to further encourage forthcoming information, the reward money for the capture of the terrorists behind the September 11 attacks now has been set at $25 million by the U.S. State Department. 
The reward money is part of a $5.1 billion spending package to deal with the costly aftermath, the first installment of a $40 billion emergency recovery package approved by Congress and President Bush. 
Some of those wanted for questioning in the alleged terrorist conspiracy have been caught in the international dragnet. 
A 29-year-old man arrested in west London in connection with the terrorist strikes on the World Trade Center was released Saturday, Scotland Yard said. 
Two other men and one woman arrested Friday by anti-terrorist branch officers remained in custody. 
The officers arrested two men and one woman in west London in 3 a.m. raids at two separate residences.
Both residences also were searched. 
A third man was arrested in the West Midlands region near Birmingham around 7 p.m., police said.
The four were apparently questioned in a central London police station. 
British police carried trash bags of evidence from the Birmingham address, and, for examination purposes, police also towed an expensive German car parked at the residence. 
Of the first three arrested, a 27-year-old man and 25-year-old woman were living together at one residence.
The 29-year-old man, now released, was picked up at another residence. 
There were no details given on the arrest of the third man, who is in his mid-40s. 
Authorities declined to explain how the suspects may have been linked to the September 11 hijackings of two jetliners that were crashed into the twin towers of the World Trade Center 18 minutes apart. 
But a law enforcement source told The Associated Press that one of four people arrested in England on Friday took flying lessons at the same Arizona school, and at the same time, as a terrorist in the Pentagon attack.
The individuals in custody had not been cooperating with authorities, the law enforcement source added. 
No nationalities were given for those arrested. 
In France, eight people are being detained suspected of belonging to extremist groups thought to be planning attacks on U.S. interests in France, the interior ministry announced. 
Counter-intelligence officers arrested the suspects on orders of magistrates probing threats made against U.S. interests, possibly including the U.S. Embassy in Paris.
The probe had been opened the day before the attacks in the United States. 
Police sources said the arrests came after an Algerian man, identified as Djamel Begal, allegedly confessed to planning an attack on the embassy while being held in the United Arab Emirates.
He gave the names and addresses of extremists in Paris, the sources said. 
At least one of the suspects apprehended in France had been in contact with Begal, and others had been under police surveillance since Begal's arrest in the UAE in July, sources said.
Police are investigating possible links between the French case and two arrests last week in Brussels. 
A prosecutor's office in Brussels said two men believed to have been planning an attack on American interests in Europe have been charged with possession of weapons of war.
They were members of a radical group, said Fabienne Laduron, a spokeswoman for the prosecutors. 
She said prosecutors were not ruling out a connection with Osama bin Laden, the Saudi exile identified by top U.S. officials as the prime suspect in the attacks. 
U.S. authorities are still seeking the extradition from Toronto of Nageeb Abdul Jabar Mohamed Al-Hadi.
In a federal complaint filed in Chicago, he's charged with carrying false documents, including multiple Yemeni passports.
The FBI said papers written in Arabic were found sewn in his clothing.
Al-Hadi was flying from Germany to Chicago when his flight was diverted to Toronto on the day of the attacks. 
Authorities also found two Lufthansa crew uniforms in his suitcases. 
A court document says Al-Hadi is believed to be a Lufthansa employee, but it was unclear whether as a contract employee he had proper access to the uniforms in his luggage. 
Al-Hadi was charged in federal court in Chicago with carrying false documents, but authorities did not immediately say what, if any, connection the man had with the hijackers.
He was not in the Chicago courtroom as the charges were filed, as he is detained in Toronto. 
The cockpit voice recorder recovered in the wreckage of United Flight 93, which crashed into a Pennsylvania field, has yielded evidence of a "definite struggle" in the cockpit.
Officials familiar with the recording say shouts in English and Arabic and the sounds of a scuffle can be heard. 
Several family members of passengers on the doomed jet previously described cell phone conversations indicating that passengers may have tried to retake control of the plane. 
FBI Director Robert Mueller visited the crash site last week.
Without going into details, Mueller seemed to confirm that the passengers attempted some type of takeover. 
"I think ... both the attorney general and I -- and the attorney general of Pennsylvania -- have indicated we believe those passengers on this jet were absolute heroes and their actions during the flight were heroic," he said. 
Other developments
Angola's UNITA rebels said Wednesday they had killed 23 government soldiers and seized huge quantities of weapons in fresh fighting near the capital of Luanda on Tuesday. 
The group said in a statement e-mailed to Reuters that its forces had stormed government positions south of Luanda, the closest attack to the seaport capital in years.
UNITA armed forces chief Gen. Geraldo Abreu signed the statement. 
There was no independent confirmation.
On Tuesday, the Luanda government said the rebels had attacked an electricity station near the capital, killing three people and cutting power and water to parts of Luanda. 
It was not clear whether the two incidents were related. 
UNITA said the attacks were part of a new strategy to take the 26-year-old war to Luanda.
Much of the war has been fought in the countryside far from the capital. 
"As part of the expansion program of its offensive and defensive military actions, the UNITA Armed Forces have just penetrated into Luanda province," the statement said. 
"The (UNITA) soldiers stormed the government's military deployment of Cabiri, southeast of Funda, which constitutes the defensive line south of Luanda," the statement added. 
It said 23 government soldiers were killed for the loss of two UNITA rebels, and five rebels were wounded while three were missing.
Huge quantities of arms were seized, including 21 AK-47 assault rifles and 25 anti-personnel land mines, it said. 
Abreu's statement said Tuesday's attack showed the rebel group, led by longtime guerrilla leader Jonas Savimbi, was capable of carrying out military strikes throughout all of the oil-and-diamond rich country's provinces. 
Regional analysts said the attacks close to the capital signified a change in UNITA's war tactics -- shaking up residents in Luanda to cut off government support. 
"Instead of launching a conventional war, UNITA is now operating small commando-style groups.
They are starting a war of attrition," Herman Hanekom, a close Angola watcher and analyst at the Pretoria-based Africa Institute, told Reuters. 
"The idea is to bring discomfort to the people of Luanda, and UNITA hopes that in so doing, it will cut off government support and force the government to talks," he added. 
On Tuesday, UNITA said the civil war in the southern African country would go on unless a 1994 peace pact was renegotiated.
It assailed what it called violations of the accord, known as the Lusaka Protocol, signed with Angola in the Zambian capital. 
At least 1 million people have been killed in the conflict, Africa's longest-running, and many more have been displaced from their homes or driven across borders into exile. 
Copyright 2001 Reuters .
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
With legislation aimed at improving airport security stalled in the Senate, the Bush administration offered a proposal Wednesday that would compromise on the issue of making airport security screeners federal employees, CNN has learned. 
The legislation is critical because knives and box cutters that slipped past airport security are thought to be the weapons used by hijackers who turned civilian jetliners into weapons that destroyed the World Trade Center and damaged the Pentagon. 
Transportation Secretary Norman Mineta met with key senators on both sides of the aisle Wednesday after Republicans blocked Democratic efforts to bring the bill to the Senate floor. 
Mineta has put forward a proposal that would put the federal government in charge of security screening, but would not necessarily make all workers doing the screening federal agents, according to a senior Republican aide. 
Under the plan, after a transitional period of 18 months, Mineta would make an airport-by-airport determination on whether to make the existing security screeners federal employees or to contract the work out. 
Based on the documents CNN obtained, the administration argued that this would make the process of transitioning to federal control much easier than simply switching control to a new federal agency. 
Using contract employees at some airports, the administration argued, would also "preserve greater flexibility for the federal government to impose standards and to discipline or remove screeners who are not performing up to expectations." 
The president and leaders on both sides of the aisle have been pressing for an airline security bill to reassure Americans that air travel is safe.
All sides want more federal air marshals, enhanced security and protections in airplane cockpits.
But the details have proven difficult. 
While Democrats want to make screeners federal employees to ensure quality, many Republicans fear doing so would create a new government bureaucracy. 
Two senior administration officials said the president wants to avoid a system in which all security personnel and airport passenger screeners are civil servants. 
"We're moving in the direction of a compromise," said one senior White House official. 
The official also signaled that Republicans who oppose any federalization of airport security personnel are likely to be disappointed. 
"Some people don't like bipartisanship," the official said.
"And we know some people are gong to squawk.
When you're pursuing a broad consensus, not everyone is going to be pleased." 
One House GOP leader said Republicans in the House were frustrated by the administration's "ambivalence" on the issue of federalizing screeners. 
"Would you want the kind of federal employees who can't even run the U.S. post offices around the country running your airport security?"
the Republican asked rhetorically. 
But some federal role may be inevitable.
In fact, Sen. Jay Rockefeller, D-W.Va., who met with Mineta along with Sens. John McCain, R-Ariz., Fritz Hollings, D-S.C., and Kay Bailey Hutchison, R-Texas, said they are all agreed that federalization of workers would happen. 
"From our side of the table, there was absolute unanimity on federalization, and we're going to write the law," Rockefeller told CNN. "
'Federalize' is no longer a bad word, it means people will get on airplanes." 
Mineta plans to return to Capitol Hill for another meeting this morning. 
Another issue being discussed is aid for laid off airline workers.
Democrats are pushing for such aid to be a part of this bill, while Republicans want it left until later. 
"For the sake of getting this done, I would plead again to my colleagues on both sides of the aisle:
let's find a way to get an agreement to do aviation security.
And then find a way to do these other issues that are all so important," said Senate Minority Leader Trent Lott, R-Mississippi.
A Florida town near the space center where manned NASA rockets roar into space observed a mournful moment of silence on Monday, 16 years after seven astronauts embarked on the fatal flight of the space shuttle Challenger. 
On Sunday, relatives and veterans of the Apollo 1 mission gathered nearby at the launch pad where three astronauts died 35 years ago during a countdown test. 
Hundreds attended a memorial service Monday at the Astronaut Memorial Plaza in Titusville, a small coastal town near the Kennedy Space Center and adjacent Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. 
The moment of silence took place at 11:38 a.m.
ET, the same date and time
when the Challenger exploded over the Atlantic Ocean less than two minutes after it lifted off from the coastal Florida launch site. 
Sparked by a faulty ring seal on a tank carrying explosive shuttle fuel, the 1986 disaster killed astronauts Dick Scobee, Michael Smith, Judy Resnik, Elison Onizuka, Ron McNair, Greg Jarvis and Christa McAullife, who had won a U.S. competition to become the first teacher in space. 
Former astronaut Sam Durrance, now the executive director of the Florida Space Research Institute, delivered the keynote speech. 
Besides honoring the Challenger crew, the service commemorated astronauts Gus Grissom, Roger Chaffee and Ed White, who died on January 27, 1967, when a blaze engulfed the Apollo 1 capsule, one week before they were to launch into orbit. 
Technicians tried in vain to rescue the men.
Pure oxygen in the capsule turned a spark from an unknown source into an instant inferno.
The highly pressurized gas also prevented anyone inside or outside the hatch from opening the door, which could only open inward. 
In the wake of the accident, NASA revamped the Apollo program with new design features that some credit with ensuring that men landed safely on the moon before the end of the decade. 
Before the accident, Grissom had said: "If we die, we want people to accept it.
We're in a risky business and we hope if anything happens to us it will not delay the program.
The conquest of space is worth the risk of life." 
On Sunday, mission engineers and relatives, including Betty Grissom, the widow of the Apollo I commander, gathered for a private service where the fire took place.
Sitting behind the wheel of his Lincoln, wearing wraparound shades and a deep melanoma scar on his face, John McCain looks like a B-movie hitman.
As a matter of fact, he is trying to kill something: Washington's seamy money culture.
The Arizona Senator has just finished an event with a 1,500-lb.
pig named Rootie, his accomplice in an annual unveiling of the pork hidden in the federal budget.
Now he is tearing the wrong way up a one-way drive into the Capitol for a press conference with conservative Blue Dog Democrats supporting his effort to drive the pigs from the trough.
After a decade of frustration, McCain's campaign-finance-reform bill will finally get its hearing on the Senate floor, without threat of filibuster, this week. 
To get this far, McCain had to triumph over his enemies.
Now he has to defeat a pal, Nebraska Senator Chuck Hagel, who calls McCain his best friend in the Senate.
Hagel still wears his MCCAIN FOR PRESIDENT button occasionally, and shows off a framed TIME cover of McCain inscribed "To my dear friend."
Yet he has authored a rival bill that has emerged as the favorite disguise for those who want to look like reformers while leaving the system porous enough for Denise Rich to drive a pardon through.
Hagel's proposal does not ban soft-money contributions but simply caps them at $120,000 per two-year cycle, though critics calculate that wealthy folks could still give half a million dollars.
When I ask McCain why he can't talk some sense into his brother-in-arms, he says their differences run too deep. "
Chuck takes soft money, which is an illegal loophole now, and enshrines it in the law." 
Hagel wouldn't be such a threat if he weren't such a good guy.
He is "McCain without the attitude," as one colleague puts it.
A Vietnam War hero, part maverick, part go-to guy for moderates of both parties, Hagel is that highly evolved political creature: principled but open for business.
The Reform Over My Dead Body folks, such as Senator Mitch McConnell, can talk to him, as can the President, who has met with Hagel three times on reform.
Although Bush's just-released "statement of principles" differs from Hagel's bill in some respects, Bush would sign it, since it allows soft money.
He would forgo tax cuts before he would sign McCain-Feingold. 
Hagel doesn't see himself standing in the way of his friend's life's dream. "
Don't make this into a Shakespearean struggle," he says.
"This is not an issue between John and me personally.
We've always known the day would come when we would go different ways."
But of all the issues in all the world, why would Hagel pick McCain's signature bill to fight over?
He's got his principles too. "
John's bill has the unintended consequence of weakening political parties by depriving them of soft money, which will then go to darker, unaccountable forces," he charges--an argument critics find laughable. 
For the moment, Bush is quietly praising Hagel, not wanting to scare off Democrats looking for a life raft after years of supporting McCain when he didn't have a chance of prevailing.
Having raised more soft money for 2000 than G.O.P. Senators did (unlikely to be repeated unless Bill and Hillary don bellhop uniforms and sneak into the Lincoln Bedroom), some Senate Democrats are now as tempted as Republicans to cling to what McCain calls the "Incumbent Protection System," which returns more than 90% of both parties to federal office.
After voting five times for McCain-Feingold, Louisiana Democrat John Breaux discovered last week that it is fatally flawed.
He now favors Hagel. 
Back in his office, McCain gobbles a tuna sandwich and meets with Colorado Representative Mark Udall, son of McCain's mentor, Democrat Mo Udall.
He recalls his favorite Udall line on the difference between an Arizona cactus and a congressional caucus. "
Here," he laughs, "the pricks are on the inside.
" McCain, who forgave the Vietnamese despite his captors' hanging him by his broken arms, is a chipper warrior, confident Hagel will lose.
During Easter recess, the two may go to Ireland, where a pint has smoothed over many a grudge.
"We were dear friends before," McCain says.
"We'll be dear friends after."
Attrition houses a "defacement mirror," a log of hacked Web sites with a re-creation of the defacement.
It also has original articles about computer security and hacking. 
a government-sponsored agency, was formed in 1988 to address Internet security threats.
Based at Carnegie Mellon Institute, CERT claims to have "responded to more than 14,000 security incidents that have affected over 200,000 sites in the Department of Defense, other federal agencies and the private sector." 
A private organization that trains and educates members on computer and network security issues, CSI describes itself as an advocate for "the critical importance of protecting information assets.
" CSI recently released a survey of some 500 businesses showing a rise in internal and external network break-ins. is a repository for information on computer security for systems administrators, managers and security professionals.
Includes in-depth information on encryption, viruses and document verification and an extensive list of links to related organizations.
Sponsored by the Computer Security Division of the National Institute of Standards and Technology. 
is an online digest of security-related news from mainstream media and trade publications.
Its computer crime archive includes links to the full text of academic addresses and topical issue papers. 
Internet Security Systems documents network attacks and security risks associated with particular computer operating systems.
Site may be searched by platform and type of risk.
Also includes archive of related news stories. 
Not to be confused with an Australian site of the same name, Infowar features articles by cyberterrorism expert Winn Schwartau and a comprehensive list of links to computer security news and resources. 
An FAQ on cyberwarfare from Don Gotterbarn of the Computer and Information Science Department of East Tennessee State University, this site includes answers to basic questions such as "What is Cyberterrorism?" and statistics on computer crimes. 
The Hackers' Alert section of this site, from the University of Southern California's Annenberg School for Communication, features a series of articles on hacking by OJR columnist and USC journalism professor Doug Thomas. 
This extensive glossary of jargon includes such words as "adger," a verb meaning, "To make a bonehead move with consequences that could have been foreseen with even slight mental effort."
The Web site is the online version of "The New Hacker's Dictionary" (1996, MIT Press) compiled by self-described hacker Eric S. Raymond. 
A leading source of information on the hacker underground.
Includes a thorough list of hacked Web sites.
The site takes special interest in the case of Kevin Mitnick, charged with computer fraud in 1995. 
An adaptation of principles for hackers outlined by Steven Levy in his 1984 book "Hackers: Heroes of the Computer Revolution."
Among the basic tenets: access to computers should be unlimited and total; all information should be free; mistrust authority -- promote decentralization. 
Dedicated to dispelling myths about the hacking subculture, Hideway says it is about "knowledge, not robbery or destruction."
Site includes a jargon dictionary, chat room and media center. 
Compiled by Michelle Slatalla, the site highlights the activities and antics of several well-known hackers, from Richard Stallman, founder of the Free Software Foundation, to phone hacker Mark Abene, a k a Phiber Optik.
Also includes a lively timeline. 
is a government watchdog group that seeks to "promote democratic values and constitutional liberties in the digital age.
" Their site tracks legislation on computer security and privacy, particularly measures concerning free speech, encryption and wiretapping. 
The modest goal of EFF, according to its mission statement: "to help civilize the electronic frontier."
Perhaps best known as the force behind the Blue Ribbon Campaign against Internet censorship, EFF is dedicated to protecting free speech online through its lobbying efforts.
Also includes an archive of more than 30 articles on hacking.
A unique project to restore the frozen huts of some of Antarctica's earliest explorers is about to get under way with royal backing. 
Britain's Princess Anne arrived in New Zealand on Tuesday and flies to the frozen continent on Wednesday to launch an ambitious international appeal for funds to restore huts used by explorers such as Britain's Captain Robert Scott and Norway's Carsten Borchgrevink. 
The five-day visit by the princess, the patron of Britain's Antarctic Trust, coincides with the 100th anniversary of Scott's first visit to Antarctica. 
Scott mounted two expeditions to Antarctica but, after hauling heavy sledges across the harsh polar plateau in 1912, was pipped by a month in the race to the South Pole by Norwegian Roald Amundsen. 
Scott and his party perished with his party on his way back to the coast, after using up all their food and fuel. 
The New Zealand Antarctic Heritage Trust has taken on the role of conserving and restoring four historic huts in the area of the Ross Ice Shelf south of New Zealand -- Scott's huts at Cape Royds and Cape Evans, fellow Briton Ernest Shackleton's hut also at Cape Royds, and the Borchgrevink's hut at Cape Adare. 
"We need to preserve these huts for the inspiration of future generations.
Where they are is the only place on earth where humans' first dwellings still survive and their preservation is of global importance," the chairman of the NZ Antarctic Heritage Trust, Rob Fenwick, told Reuters. 
The crude and flimsy wooden huts, the oldest no more than a century old, housed the early explorers for months on end, but are now falling victim to time and Antarctica's harsh climate.
The walls, encrusted with soot from the seal blubber burnt by explorers to keep warm, hold shelves containing the tinned food, tools, and equipment left by the original inhabitants.
Frozen meat is also preserved by the cold. 
Borchgrevink, a teacher turned whaler and explorer, led the British Southern Cross expedition in 1899 that was the first to winter over on Antarctica, during an unsuccessful search for the southern magnetic pole. 
Shackleton, a member of Scott's first expedition in 1901-04 until he was sent home ill, returned with expeditions in 1907-09 -- which reached the magnetic pole but fell 97 nautical miles short of the geographical pole -- and then in 1914-17 in an unsuccessful attempt to cross the continent. 
The New Zealand government has given NZ$400,000 to the restoration cause and the trust expects to raise much more from other governments, individuals, and organizations around the world. 
No target has been specified but saving and restoring each hut will be a complicated job, Fenwick said. 
Preliminary work has already started on Shackleton's hut, erected in 1908 at Cape Royds near the present day New Zealand Antarctic headquarters at Scott Base on Ross Island. 
Tradesmen and experts will be taken to Antarctica this year to work on the huts, which are dotted around a relatively small area on the frozen continent -- which is about twice the size of Australia. 
Fenwick hopes that at the end of the project, the modern generation will have fulfilled an entry in one of Ernest Shackleton's diaries: "To us and future generations they are a legacy which we now need to ensure remains frozen in time -- forever!" 
Copyright 2002 Reuters .
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
Saudi Arabian Prince Alwaleed bin Talal bin Abdel Aziz al Saud, who is sixth on the Forbes list of the world's richest people and has some $16 billion invested in such American companies as Citigroup ($9.65 billion), News Corp. ($1.1 billion), Apple ($314 million) and TIME's parent company, AOL Time Warner ($932 million), is known as one of the most ardent Arab supporters of the U.S.
"It is my personal duty," he said before leaving Saudi Arabia for a trip to New York City, "to show my alliance and show the real face of the Arab, Islam and Saudi Arabia."
And so, during a tour of ground zero, he presented New York City Mayor Rudolph Giuliani with a check for $10 million to aid the victims of the World Trade Center attacks. 
But in a simultaneously released written statement, Prince Alwaleed insisted that the U.S. "should re-examine its policies in the Middle East and adopt a more balanced stance toward the Palestinian cause."
He said, "We must address some of the issues that led to such a criminal attack."
Learning this, Giuliani rejected the donation, calling the statement "highly irresponsible and very, very dangerous." 
Back in Riyadh, Alwaleed had no regrets, but agreed that the feud was a setback for improved understanding.
In an interview with TIME, he offered conciliatory words, saying he respects Giuliani and believes he is "doing a good job under tremendous stress."
But he adds, "I went there to help bridge gaps with Americans.
Mayor Giuliani had responsibility to bridge gaps too.
Our job is never to give up."
Upset with the Bush administration's proposed antitrust settlement with Microsoft, Los Angeles programmer Dan Kegel posted a letter to the United States Justice Department on his Web site.
He soon had more than 2,100 co-signers. 
"It lacks effective enforcement and it fails to prohibit a number of anticompetitive licensing practices," said Kegel, with the approval of private software developers at universities, businesses and government laboratories.
"It's taking away the chance for real competition in the operating system market." 
Kegel's letter is one of thousands that interest groups, industry groups and even regular citizens have filed with the Justice Department by Monday's deadline for public comment on the settlement. 
The judge handling the case has ordered the department to summarize the comments for the court and publish them all in the Federal Register within 30 days.
The department said it has no plans to go beyond the court requirements in releasing the comments. 
Steven Aftergood of the Project on Government Secrecy says the government should make the public comments in such a high-profile case easier to read online, rather than in the voluminous Federal Register. 
"What is the point of soliciting public comment if the comments are going to be buried or ignored?" he asks. 
Microsoft and its critics both worked to ensure their views were reflected in the comments.
Americans for Technology Leadership (ATL), made up of Microsoft and several others friendly to the software giant, offered letter-writers extra chances to win a handheld computer. 
is a co-sponsor of this week's Conservative Political Action Conference.
With access to the addresses of people registered to attend the conservative get-together, ATL sent letters deriding the antitrust suit and urging attendees to send an e-mail to Justice to "bring to a close one of the remaining legacies of the Clinton administration." 
If the comments were also sent to ATL, the attendee got two entries to win a handheld computer -- rather than just one at ATL's conference booth.
Compaq iPaq computers, which run Microsoft software, can cost up to $650.
ATL executive director Jim Prendergast says he doesn't think there's anything wrong with the computer offer. 
"A lot of times we'll go to conventions and the iPaq is something we use to encourage people to get involved," Prendergast says.
"That's not a bribe." 
Prendergast says he has received many calls from supporters, but declines to disclose how many people have used his site to send comments to Justice. 
The Web site for ProComp, a group funded by Microsoft rivals, had a pop-up window asking visitors to write to Justice.
Microsoft's Freedom to Innovate site had a similar request. 
In its comments, ProComp included an affidavit from Kenneth J. Arrow, a Nobel laureate economist at Stanford University.
Arrow, the government's economics expert in a previous antitrust action against Microsoft, said the current settlement ignores how Microsoft's dominance has grown since the mid-1990s and omits "forward-looking remedies that address such efforts by Microsoft to protect and enhance its existing market power by using its illegally maintained monopoly." 
Time Warner -- parent company of CNN -- also submitted comments critical of the settlement, as did several consumer groups. 
the Microsoft-funded Americans for Competitive Technology and former attorneys general Griffin Bell and Edwin Meese sent papers supporting the deal. 
It's unclear how the Justice Department will treat the comments, which could run into the hundreds of thousands.
Justice is only required to summarize them, although the judge hearing the case will be able to read them as she decides whether the settlement is in the public interest. 
"I bet my wife a nickel in December that I could make a difference, and I'm still waiting to collect on the bet," Kegel said. 
In separate developments, lawyers for California plaintiffs in the private Microsoft class-action suit have objected to part of the federal settlement that may erase Microsoft's antitrust liability. 
The settlement states it would not "confer upon any other persons any rights or remedies of any nature whatsoever.
" The California lawyers say they fear that language could threaten the class-action suit, which alleges Microsoft overcharged customers for its products. 
Also, Microsoft told the federal court Monday that it and AOL Time Warner have resolved their disagreement over documents requested by Microsoft in the portion of the antitrust case still being pursued by nine states. 
Copyright 2002
The Associated Press .
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
The British Government says that two loyalist paramilitary groups in Northern Ireland are no longer considered to be observing ceasefires. 
The British secretary of state for Northern Ireland, John Reid, made the announcement on Friday afternoon in Belfast.
The groups were supposed to be observing ceasefires in support of Northern Ireland's 1998 peace accord. 
The announcement follows serious violence involving two Protestant paramilitary organisations in the past few weeks. 
One of the organisations, the Ulster Defense Association (UDA), was accused of orchestrating street rioting in North Belfast. 
"They have systematically breached their ceasefire and the patience of the people of Northern Ireland has run out," Reid said. 
The other group, the Loyalist Volunteer Force (LVF), is suspected of being behind the murder of an investigative journalist. 
The Secretary of State, who made his announcement after talks with RUC Chief Constable Sir Ronnie Flanagan, said he had "clear information" of LVF involvement in the murder. 
His statement followed fresh trouble in Belfast's Protestant Shankill area on Thursday night when police involved in an arms and drugs search were attacked by a mob. 
Dr Reid said the UDA and LVF had showed contempt for the people of Northern Ireland, for peace and democracy. 
"They seem determined to spurn the opportunity -- given to them by the people -- to make the transition from violence to democracy," he said. 
Although it is not automatic, Friday's ruling means some former prisoners who were members of the organisations could be returned to prison. 
There are now fears in Belfast of an escalation in the campaign of violence, particularly by the UDA.
Two things terrify today's computer users: viruses and hackers.
And just like viruses, most people don't understand hackers or what they do. 
Hackers come in many varieties.
The term "hacker" usually brings to mind three of these -- people who break the security of computer networks, people who break the security on application software, and people who create malicious programs like viruses.
These aren't mutually exclusive, but it's a simple way to divide the activities that fall under "hacking." 
These are the hackers you see in movies, usually as unattractive, introverted and anti-social -- or ultra-hip, sexy and connected.
Real hackers don't fit those stereotypes.
They aren't nerds living in darkened dorm rooms or multi-millionaire industrial spies.
They are average people with strong computer skills and the desire to test those skills in ways that often prove illegal. 
Network hackers engage in several sorts of activities.
Some, like "denial of service attacks" or "mail bombs," are designed to swamp a computer network's ability to respond and perform its internal functions.
For instance, a denial of service attack on a Web server floods it with bogus requests for pages.
The server spends so much time trying to process these requests that it can't respond to legitimate requests and may crash.
A mail bomb is similar but targets a victim's mail server.
A number of businesses and Internet service providers have suffered these sorts of attacks in recent years. 
Another form of network hacking involves penetrating a secure area by subverting its security measures.
Network hackers might accomplish this by setting up programs that try millions of passwords until one is accepted.
A hacker may set up "sniffers," programs that check data to find encrypted or sensitive information.
Once they gather the information they can decode it, or if unencrypted, use it directly to find out more about a network and penetrate it more easily. 
Once hackers get onto the machines that host networks, they can alter or remove files, steal information and erase the evidence of those activities.
But many hackers break security systems just to see if they can do it.
They may enter the system, look at the data within and never go back.
For these hackers, it's more a test of skill than an attempt to steal or alter data. 
Application software, such as programs for word processing or graphics, puts the power of a personal computer in the hands of a user, even one who doesn't know how the computer works.
It's often expensive and, like anything else that's useful but expensive, there's bound to be someone who wants to get it free of charge.
That's where "crackers" -- hackers who break software security -- come in. 
These hackers develop their own software that can circumnavigate or falsify the security measures that keep the application from being replicated on a PC.
For instance, you have a piece of software that requires a serial number to install.
A software hacker does this in much the same way that network hackers attack network security.
They may set up a serial number generator that tries millions of combinations of numbers and letters until it finds one that matches.
The hacker could also attack the program at the assembly-code level, finding and altering the security measures. 
One note:
A software hacker is not necessarily a software pirate.
A hacker may break the security and use the software, but a true pirate would also replicate and sell the cracked software. 
Some hackers are also virus builders.
Viruses, worms, Trojan horses and logic bombs are all forms of programs that can invade a system.
Some are malicious, some aren't. 
A virus is a program that may or may not attach itself to a file and replicate itself.
It may or may not corrupt the data of the file it invades.
It may or may not try to use all of the computer's processing resources in an attempt to crash the machine.
If that seems vague, it's because viruses are tricky.
They may be simple notes that say "Hello" -- or they may attack and corrupt the files at the core of the system, causing it to crash. 
Worms invade a computer and steal its resources to replicate themselves.
They use networks to spread themselves. 
A Trojan horse appears to do one thing but does something else.
The system may accept it as one thing, but upon execution it may release a virus, worm or logic bomb. 
A logic bomb is an attack triggered by an event, like the computer clock reaching a certain date.
It might release a virus or be a virus itself. 
No one connected to a computer network is really safe from hackers.
Luckily, most invasions or infections don't result in serious injury to the system that has been attacked. 
The only real defense is limiting your risk by using virus scanners and enforcing security measures on network computers.
But in the end, hackers see security systems as a challenge, not an obstacle. 
Technology and Society at the World Wide Web Consortium
(W3C) --
The W3C tries to set and maintain standards for the portion of the Internet people are most familiar with, the World Wide Web.
The Technology and Society domain seeks to influence public and private policy on issues, including security, arising out of the development of Web technology.
The articles may be a little dry, but the information is good. 
Electronic Freedom Foundation --
An organization dedicated to keeping the Internet an uninhibited medium for information, the EFF is an excellent source of information about security issues and legislation that affects the Internet. 
David Mandeville is an application engineer at iXL.
The Israeli Defense Ministry said Tuesday it is canceling all offensive operations against the Palestinians after Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat reaffirmed his determination to honor a cease-fire. 
In a statement earlier in the day, Arafat ordered his security commanders not to fire on Israeli targets even when under fire from Israeli forces -- the first time he had told his police officers not to shoot back in self-defense if attacked. 
He said he had instructed his commanders to "act intensively" in securing a cease-fire with Israel and appealed again for the resumption of talks. 
In Washington, White House Press Secretary Ari Fleischer said the United States welcomed news of a cease-fire and resumption of contacts. 
"The president hopes to see these steps implemented immediately on the ground," Fleischer said. 
"The president has called on all parties, and reiterates it today, to seize this moment and do everything possible in the wake of this attack on the United States to move forward with the peace process in the Middle East." 
Secretary of State Colin Powell said: "We have seen promise ... lets hope we can see some developments that will continue with this sense of promise." 
The order came after a night of fighting in which two Palestinians were killed -- one in Hebron and one in Nablus. 
In his statement Arafat said: "This morning I have reiterated my orders to all my security commanders to act intensively in securing a cease-fire on all fronts, and in every town and village.
I also instructed them to exercise maximum self-restraint in the face of Israeli aggression and attacks." 
"We, Palestinians and Israelis, have to work together to break the vicious cycle of violence.
Let us get together, let us sit down and negotiate peace, let us improve the lives of Israelis and Palestinians and move towards a just and lasting peace and cooperation." 
Shortly afterward, the Israeli Defense Ministry confirmed it was halting all offensive operations against the Palestinians. 
Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres told CNN: "The world is facing an unbelievable danger and we have to put aside secondary skirmishes." 
Peres said there would "undoubtedly" now be a meeting between the two sides -- possibly within days if the truces held. 
Arafat and Peres were scheduled to meet Sunday, but that meeting was called off by Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon.
Sharon has said the meeting could go on if there is a 48-hour period with no terror attacks. 
Saeb Erakat, the chief Palestinian negotiator, told CNN: "I think this is a very significant development, but you have to keep in mind the trust level between the two sides is below zero." 
He said the United States should send an emissary to the region, and also called for observers and monitors to be sent.
He said a meeting between Arafat and Peres should take place immediately. 
Speaking at a special Knesset session called to demonstrate solidarity with the United States following last week's terrorist attacks, Sharon said if Arafat declared a cease-fire, Israel would immediately cease all its actions against the Palestinian Authority. 
Then, the prime minister said, after 48 hours of complete quiet Peres and Arafat could meet to discuss ways of stabilizing the cease-fire. 
As part of the stand-down, the Israel Defense Forces said Israeli troops would begin withdrawing from Palestinian-controlled areas where they have staged incursions. 
An area where the Palestinians are in full civil and security control is known as an "Area A." Israeli incursions into those areas has been a major sticking point between the two sides. 
Israeli troops are currently inside Palestinian-controlled areas near Jenin, Jericho and Ramallah. 
In the West Bank, the Palestine Red Crescent said one Palestinian was killed and a second was injured at a village near Jenin. 
Israel Radio quoted the Israel Defense Forces as saying the men were apparently trying to plant an explosive device.
The IDF said the men approached a checkpoint on a tractor and refused to stop even after IDF troops fired warning shots. 
The IDF also said that after the Arafat statement was issued Palestinians opened fire at Israeli troops near the Egyptian border at Rafah.
The IDF said no one was injured and there was no damage. 
CNN's Mike Hanna said the cease-fire announcements were a "very powerful" development and an indication that U.S pressure in the aftermath of the hijack attacks on New York and Washington was "bearing fruit on the ground." 
"We are at a new juncture and can move forward for the first time in a long time.
However the situation on the ground is very fragile," the U.N. envoy to the Middle East, Terje Roed-Larsen, told CNN.
Former Attorney General Janet Reno is expected to announce Tuesday that she is taking steps to pave the way for a possible gubernatorial run in Florida, sources said. 
"Stay tuned," Reno said Monday, when asked by local reporters about her plans. 
Reno, a Miami native, returned to her home state early this year after serving eight years as the top law enforcement officer in the country during the Clinton administration. 
She is expected to announce Tuesday that she is filing paperwork that will allow her to designate a campaign treasurer and begin to raise money for a possible run. 
If she runs and wins the Democratic nomination, Reno, 63, would likely face incumbent Gov. Jeb Bush, the brother of President Bush. 
Tuesday's announcement is expected to come in the form of a press release, and a formal announcement about an actual candidacy would likely come later. 
Reno stressed Monday that it was premature to say she was a candidate. 
"I have not made a final decision yet," she said, adding that she was still talking to people about a run.
"I want to make the wisest decision I can."
Reno attended a Labor Day picnic for South Dade County Democrats.
People greeted her as if she were already a candidate, wishing her luck and shaking her hand. 
"We need somebody like you," one elderly woman told Reno.
In return, Reno talked like a candidate, saying people are looking for "common sense" answers. 
A Reno candidacy would supercharge what is already one of the hottest 2002 gubernatorial races.
Many Democrats would love to see Gov. Bush defeated as a payback for the Florida presidential dispute, if nothing else. 
A controversial figure in Washington, Reno served as Dade County state's attorney for 10 years before joining the Clinton administration. 
Her record as attorney general was controversial, particularly her leadership during the Branch Davidian crisis in Waco, Texas, and various investigations of Clinton and then-Vice President Al Gore.
Her decisions led to criticism from both Democrats and Republicans at times. 
She disclosed her possible interest in a run for the governor's office in May, and at that time, she discounted the suggestion that her Parkinson's disease -- a neurological disorder that causes involuntary tremors -- would hurt her prospective candidacy. 
"If you could survive eight years in Washington, with the press corps in Washington, with Congress in Washington, and go at it as I did, and then come home and kayak down the Chattooga, the Nantahala and the Ocoee in three days and come out of it without having stumped your boat, you're doing pretty good," Reno told CNN in May. "
I think I can do it, otherwise I wouldn't be here.
" If she decides to run for governor, Reno would likely face a battle for Florida's Cuban-American vote because of her handling of Elian Gonzalez, the Cuban boy who was rescued off the Florida coast on Thanksgiving Day in 1999 only to be seized by U.S. authorities many months later
so he could be returned to his father in Cuba. 
"I don't expect that I will get people to agree with me," she said of the Cuban-American community, "but I think that they will come to understand the reason I did what I did.
" 
The state's sizeable Cuban-American population remains angry over the decision, but there are now as many non-Cuban Hispanics in the state as Cuban-Americans. 
Health warnings on computer games?   
Computer games with vibrating hand-held control devices should carry health warnings because they can cause damage to hands, British doctors said on Friday. 
The doctors think parents and children should be aware of potential health problems that could be caused by prolonged use of the devices. 
"We believe that, with increasing numbers of children playing these devices, there should be consideration for statutory health warnings to advise users and parents," said Gavin Cleary of Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital in London. 
Cleary and his colleagues called for the health warnings in a letter to the British Medical Journal after a 15-year-old boy developed symptoms similar to hand-arm vibration syndrome, which is caused by using industrial tools for long periods of time. 
The syndrome was classified as an industrial disease in 1985 and sufferers receive disability benefits and compensation. 
The boy, who played computer games with a vibrating control device for up to seven hours a day, suffered pain and swelling in his hands. 
"The seven hours a day that our patient reported is excessive and exceeds the manufacturer's recommendation, but we must assume that this is not an uncommon occurrence," said Cleary. 
Video game console manufacturers reportedly believe the condition is very rare and suggest that users take a break every hour to relieve any potential strain. 
Copyright 2002 Reuters .
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
Rep. Curt Weldon, R-Pennsylvania: "
It's a failure of our intelligence system. ...
It's a failure that was caused by a lack of resources and by a complacency that set in over the last 10 years, a complacency that convinced all of us that with the demise of the Soviet Union, there were no more threats."
Sen. John McCain, R-Arizona: "The unwarranted, unprovoked attacks on innocent Americans is clearly an act of war and one that requires that kind of response."
Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah:
"I think most authorities agree this is something we doubt Iran, Iraq or Libya would try and do, because they know of the massive response we would have to bring down on them."
Sen. Christopher Dodd, D-Connecticut: "We stand completely and totally behind our president.
We may have our differences from time to time, but on a day like this, which rivals or not exceeds the attack on Pearl Harbor, we stand united behind our president and our government."
Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Massachusetts: "All of us deplore the acts of terrorism that we have seen in these last minutes, and our hearts reach out to all of those who have suffered, lost their lives or who are injured right now, and all of us reach out to the brave rescue workers who are attempting to help our fellow citizens." 
Sen. Robert Byrd, D-West Virginia: "We can be shocked, but we shouldn't be overly surprised by what we're seeing.
Planes are capable of diving into buildings, and there are lots of suicide bombers all over the world." 
A team of investigators are preparing to board the salvaged wreck of the Kursk nuclear submarine. 
Russia's chief prosecutor General Vladimir Ustinov is to fly to the Arctic port of Roslyakovo -- where the wreckage has been installed on a floating dock -- on Monday to head the investigation. 
The 18,000-ton vessel, which sank after an explosion during exercises in the Barents Sea in August 2000 killing its entire 118-man crew, was raised from the sea bed earlier this month. 
Many Russian and foreign experts have said the initial explosion was set off by an internal malfunction, but government officials say it may have collided with another vessel. 
According to the official Web site of the Kursk salvage operation, Ustinov said he expected to find new evidence in the wreckage that might explain the disaster, including "journals, notes by the duty officer about the exercises and notes left by the sailors." 
But officials think the submarine's first compartment, mangled in the explosion and left behind when the wreck was raised, would have contained the most information. 
"Without examining the bow of the boat, it is impossible to completely clarify the cause of the disaster," Ustinov told The Associated Press news agency. 
Russian officials say they will retrieve the wreckage of the first compartment next year if possible, reported the news agency. 
A senior navy official said one of the most difficult stages of the salvage effort is yet to come: dismantling the 22 Granit cruise missiles left on board. 
Vice Admiral Mikhail Barskov told Russian news agency Interfax that it was unclear what condition the missiles were in, and dismantling them will entail "a significant element of risk." 
But he said it would be impossible for the missiles to launch by themselves, the news agency reported. 
Each missile weighs 6.9 metric tonnes (7.6 short tonnes) and is 10.5 metres (35 feet) long.
The warheads weigh one metric tonne (1.1 short tonne) each.
The new homeland security director officially appointed two top lieutenants to protect against domestic terrorism.
One will combat cyber attacks, and the other will serve as President Bush's main adviser on global matters related to terrorism. 
Bush's homeland security czar, former Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Ridge, joined National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice to make the announcements Tuesday at a government office building next to the White House. 
Richard Clarke, already on the National Security Council as a special adviser for cyber security, will take over a new post in charge of combating cyber terrorism and protecting essential information networks. 
"Protecting this information is critically important.
Shut them down and you shut down America as we know it," said Ridge, who officially assumed his new post Monday. 
Clarke will head up efforts to safeguard information systems, which includes transportation, communications, power utilities, industries, water and health systems, banking and finance, and emergency services organizations. 
Should a crisis take place, Clarke will be the lead coordinator to bring vital systems back online.
"Our very way of life depends on the secure and safe operations of critical systems that depend on cyberspace," Clarke told reporters. 
Working with military and intelligence resources, Downing will advise the president on efforts intended to detect and disrupt international terrorist organizations, according to the White House. 
Downing authored a report highly critical of military security measures after a 1996 bombing killed 19 U.S. soldiers in Saudi Arabia.
His study suggested that the U.S. government consider terrorism "an undeclared war against the United States." 
Ridge called Downing "a leader who understands terrorism, how terrorists are organized and what it takes to defeat them." 
Retired since 1996, Downing said he had enjoyed his more relaxed life.
Work consisted in large part of fine-tuning his trout-fishing technique in Colorado. 
He had resisted earlier pleas that he return to public office, but this time around he said he "was happy to be asked to get back into this fray." 
Downing said he would not have returned unless there was a national emergency.
"It is a national emergency," he said.
Orbiting the earth in a cramped space station may leave astronauts little time for the finer things in life. 
But if a plan by Japan's space agency comes to fruition, they could spend their spare moments learning the elaborate rituals of the Japanese tea ceremony. 
The National Space Development Agency (NASDA) is one of the groups working on the $95 billion international space station, led by Russia and the United States. 
The agency is working with fine arts professors and students on a plan to use a space measuring four square meters (13 square ft) in its allocated area as a tea ceremony room. 
Usually performed by elegant, kimono-clad women, the Japanese tea ceremony is a highly formalized method of preparing green tea from powder that hardly seems to lend itself to a zero-gravity environment. 
But NASDA emphasizes the relaxing atmosphere of the tea ceremony room itself -- usually a small, simply decorated space with tatami rush mat flooring. 
"Space travel can be psychologically difficult, so the idea is to have a place to relax, a healing space," said NASDA spokesman Yoshihiro Nakamura. 
Copyright 2002 Reuters .
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
The deliberate and deadly attacks that were carried out against our country," President Bush said the day after the hijackers turned planes into missiles, "were more than acts of terror.
They were acts of war."
On cue, by Friday CNN was billing its coverage "America's New War," and Secretary of State Colin Powell was vowing that America would use "all the tools and weapons at our disposal" to fight it. 
The rhetoric of war has always come trippingly off the tongue.
But as soldiers know, the reality of war is a fog of confusion.
And this war may be foggier than most.
Nobody knows how to fight a global war against terrorists and those who harbor them--nobody has ever fought such a war before.
As officials in Washington scrambled to assess their options last week, they faced questions unknown to their predecessors in high office: Who is our enemy?
Where will the war's battlefields be? 
To begin answering those puzzles, Bush and Powell last week set to work forging the sort of broad coalition--reaching from traditional allies like Britain to troubled states like Pakistan--that worked so well for George H.W. Bush during the Gulf War.
As the week went on, there was a growing conviction in Washington that the U.S. can't win this war alone.
"There's no serious unilateral option," said a senior Administration official.
"You've got to involve others." 
The President handled calls with friends such as the Presidents of France and Italy, and he spoke twice to President Vladimir Putin of Russia.
Powell and his staff handled the trickier negotiations.
State Department sources tell TIME that the U.S. has asked Pakistan for use of its ports, the plainest indication that Washington intends a substantial military action against Osama bin Laden's training camps in Afghanistan.
Sources also tell TIME that the Administration is considering reaching out to both Libya and Iran for assistance, even though both nations have themselves sponsored terrorism in the past.
The State Department, working through diplomatic routes established by Britain and another country, is trying to see if Iran's and Libya's somewhat supportive responses to the bombing can be turned into something concrete.
"We are going to smoke them out a little bit on their statements," says a source.
Through its intermediaries, the U.S. has conveyed the message to Tehran and Tripoli: "We appreciate what you said.
Now what else are you going to do?" 
For Powell, who had previously been shut out of the Bush Administration's control room, the crisis has provided the perfect opportunity to put himself at the center of policymaking.
He is relishing the task.
"The four stars are bulging out of his shoulders," says a State Department official.
"Powell doesn't get into conflicts easily.
But when he does, he wants to use overwhelming force."
At news conferences throughout the week, the Secretary detailed an endless round of diplomacy: the first-ever commitment by NATO to activate Article 5 of the Washington Treaty, which considers an attack on one member of the alliance as an attack on all; expressions of solidarity by foreign ministers from Italy to India; a warm letter from President Bashar al-Assad of Syria. 
Welcome though such support might be, foreign ministers won't be flying the planes or crouching in the foxholes when the first stage of a military campaign against terrorism takes place.
And since the states that can be said to harbor terrorism include Syria, Iran, Iraq, Afghanistan and Sudan, the broadest conceptions of such a campaign would amount to a third World War.
In the short term, any military operations will be more limited in scope.
As suspicion hardened in Washington that al-Qaeda ("the base"), the network of terrorists associated with bin Laden, was behind the attacks, plans began to take shape for action against its camps in Afghanistan.
At the Pentagon, and at MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa, Fla., home of U.S. Central Command, officers dusted off the options for attacking bin Laden that were first prepared after al-Qaeda operatives bombed American embassies in Kenya and Tanzania three years ago. 
On that occasion, the Clinton Administration launched cruise-missile strikes on the Afghan camps as well as on an alleged nerve-gas plant in Sudan.
The attacks were widely dismissed as doing nothing more than burning a few tents, though a senior Clinton Administration counterterrorism official claims that bin Laden "almost got killed.
" Whatever happens this time will be a lot bigger--though it will likely fall short of a full-scale invasion.
The last army to march successfully through Afghanistan was led by Alexander the Great.
In 1842, when a British expeditionary force of 17,000 was forced to retreat from Kabul to Jalalabad, just one man--an army doctor--survived.
The Soviet Union's mighty Red Army invaded Afghanistan with tanks and helicopter gunships in 1979; 10 years later, cold and defeated, its troops left the place hoping never to see it again. 
But if an invasion is ruled out, substantial military force is not.
As soon as the U.S. gathers credible intelligence on bin Laden's whereabouts, expect a combination of air power and special forces on the ground.
"I think we'll end up paralyzing a big chunk of Afghanistan with air strikes, and then move rapidly to do a decisive takedown," a U.S. Army general tells TIME.
If that is the game, a nighttime blizzard of cruise missiles and bombs would be followed by U.S. commandos--probably including elements of the 82nd Airborne, backed by elite Army Rangers and Delta Force members--all trying to capture or kill bin Laden. "
[Bush] won't be taken seriously if he tries to do it all from the air," says an Army officer of his Commander in Chief.
"We can do a lot of things with our jets and missiles, but we can't find a specific person.
You need boots on the ground to do that." 
Getting boots to the right place is easier said than done.
For one thing, such an operation doesn't play to the strengths of the U.S. military; 12 years ago, it took 24,000 troops 14 days to find Manuel Noriega in the relatively benign environment of Panama.
"We're good at hitting big, immovable things," says an Air Force general.
"We don't do so well when they move around and they're small."
Both are true of bin Laden. "
He is the hardest man ever to get to," says Magnus Ranstorp, a terrorism expert at St. Andrews University in Scotland.
To avoid being spotted by satellites, bin Laden and his associates use human couriers to relay messages, who sometimes travel on foot rather than in cars.
He has been extra careful since Chechen secessionist leader Dzhokar Dudayev was blown up by a Russian rocket while using a satellite phone.
Though the CIA has often been criticized for its failure to infiltrate Islamic fundamentalist groups, Ranstorp is more forgiving.
"The U.S. has expended as much energy and time as it feasibly could to get close to bin Laden.
But he's very well versed in counterintelligence and in how to protect himself." 
And even if the special forces get to him, what then?
This isn't a case, in the sort of language loved by military folks, in which you just cut off the head of the snake and let the body wither.
"Terrorism is not bin Laden," says a senior U.S. intelligence official.
"He's got lieutenants waiting to succeed him."
The cellular, secretive structure of al-Qaeda--small groups of operatives acting almost independently--militates against a quick, decisive strike.
Says Ranstorp: "Al-Qaeda is truly a multinational enterprise; they have made it into a decentralized organization that understands the power of asymmetric warfare in overcoming superpower supremacy." 
The international nature of al-Qaeda makes the task of defeating it that much harder.
There are thought to be sympathizers and operatives in dozens of countries, all sharing a messianic vision of an Islamic holy war and posing new challenges to the forces of counterterrorism.
Many of bin Laden's foot soldiers have combat and logistical experience gained in the Afghan war of 1979-89; indeed, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan turns out to have been one of those events that unexpectedly changes the world.
It hastened the demise of the Soviet Union, as poorly trained young Soviet troops got massacred in hostile terrain.
It convinced American policymakers, who supported the Afghan resistance, that the U.S. could wage war by proxy, spending treasure but no American blood.
And most important, it armed and radicalized a generation of extremists--bin Laden among them--who flocked to Afghanistan from all over the world and who now assist radical Islamic groups from Chechnya to the Philippines and figure out how to crash planes into skyscrapers. 
Because terrorists of this new breed are motivated mainly by religious fervor and are part of a global network, they are tough to take out. "
Traditional" terrorist groups like the I.R.A. or the Basque group ETA have had distinct nationalist goals; their operatives have been recruited from a relatively small pool, defined by national allegiance, and have often been eventually wooed into mainstream politics.
Al-Qaeda is different.
On the very fringe of the Islamic world, within which its methods provoke widespread revulsion, its political goal, if it can be said to have one, is the creation of a global Islamic caliphate; it has no interest in conventional politics.
And because its motivation is religious rather than nationalistic, it can recruit anywhere from the disaffected among the world's 1 billion Muslims.
That's why top-quality surveillance and policing are as much a part of the fight against terrorism as anything armies might do.
You can't lob a cruise missile at Delray Beach, Fla., or dispatch a Delta Force squad to Fort Lee, N.J.--though both towns seem to have been home, at least for a while, to some of those who hijacked the planes last week. 
With time, however, the U.S. hopes that it can end the tacit assistance that some nations offer terrorists, then eradicate the terror cells themselves.
Last week Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz spoke of "removing the sanctuaries, removing the support systems" and ending state support for terrorism.
Wolfowitz is one of those who have advocated toppling Saddam Hussein in a process of "regime change" in Iraq.
The case would be hugely advanced if it could be shown that Saddam was involved in last week's incidents.
Was he?
Bob Graham, chairman of the Senate intelligence committee, says there is "some evidence" that Saddam was involved, evidence that is "credible enough that you can't take Iraq off the list."
U.S. intelligence sources tell TIME that, so far, the case against Saddam is vague and thin--a few intelligence reports from southwestern Asia have suggested an Iraqi role in training last week's terrorists--and not strong enough to put Iraq on the target list for immediate retaliation.
Yet even if Saddam was involved, changing the Iraqi regime to one more aligned with Western interests would be a tall order.
Defense Department sources tell TIME that a classified study has just concluded that absent a long war--of the sort the World War II Allies fought against Germany and Japan--it is almost impossible for a military intervention from outside to impose changes that stick. 
The Taliban has many enemies, which gives the U.S. a list of potential friends.
Moscow--which supported Massood--hates it for providing aid to Chechen rebels and destabilizing Tajikistan, whose hard-pressed armed forces are assisted by Russian ones.
China is worried that Muslim Uighur separatists are being trained in Afghan camps.
India is desperate to stop the flow to Kashmir of fighters trained by bin Laden.
Iran, a nation of Shi'ite Muslims, detests the Taliban because it consists of Sunni extremists; moreover, Tehran has to deal both with Afghan refugees and with drug runners who have been fighting a low-level war with Iranian border guards.
Iran itself has a history of sponsoring terrorism in the Middle East, and although its intelligence ministry is under the control of reformist President Mohammed Khatami, the security apparatus is not.
But the government condemned last week's attacks in the U.S. (it was silent after the African embassy bombings in 1998).
Says a senior Administration official: "The U.S. and Iran obviously have something of a common enemy in the Taliban," while another confirms that there are "openings" to Tehran. 
Of late, the Taliban's major support has come from Pakistan, a self-declared Islamic republic in which Islamic radicals--who want to end Indian rule in Kashmir--have become increasingly influential.
On roads in northwestern Pakistan that border Afghanistan, signs advertise training camps run by jihadis: FIGHT IN THE WAY OF ALLAH, FREE COMMANDO TRAINING.
Any substantial action against Afghanistan would need Pakistani cooperation.
That's why the crucial meeting last week was between Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage and Mahmoud Ahmad, the head of the powerful Pakistani InterServices Intelligence department, who was visiting Washington.
A senior Administration official says Armitage gave Ahmad a set of demands that were "eyeball peeling," including the rights to overfly Pakistan's territory (important if the U.S. is to use the two aircraft carriers it has in the region), a full exchange of intelligence and the use of its ports.
"You're either 100% with us or 100% against us," said Armitage, according to the senior official. 
In Islamabad, top military and intelligence officials in the government of President Pervez Musharraf held a series of intense meetings.
They sized up their options and decided to throw in their lot with the Americans, despite concerns over the reaction on the street.
Pakistani officials, sources say, realized that the U.S. action against bin Laden was likely to be "massive and indiscriminate" and saw little reason that their own nation should want to be collateral damage.
Musharraf, said Rifaat Hussain, a defense expert at an Islamabad university, "can either swim with the international current or sink with the Taliban."
The decision to back the U.S., sources say, was made easier by a growing Pakistani frustration with the Taliban.
Islamabad supported the regime hoping that it would bring peace and stability to the region, but the war with the Northern Alliance continues, as does a destabilizing flow of refugees and arms. 
The Taliban leadership sounds rattled.
Toward the end of last week, it threatened war against any country that helped the U.S. mount an attack.
Bush, for his part, needs to be realistic about the cohesion of any new coalition.
Negotiations with the Russians start next week, though Defense Minister Sergei Ivanov has already ruled out the use of central Asian territory by "NATO military operations."
Told that Pakistan has signed on to the coalition, Bush commented, "I appreciate that statement, and now we'll just find out what that means, won't we?"
Islamabad will certainly try to exact a price for its cooperation, especially some relief from the economic sanctions imposed after it tested nuclear devices in 1998.
Arab states asked to join the coalition will doubtless request some guarantee that the U.S. will kick-start the stalled peace process in the Middle East.
In the short term, that is not in the cards; it would look too much like a reward to Israel's enemies.
But in the end, finding a lasting peace in the Middle East may be a prerequisite to winning the new war. 
Experts in terrorism the world over, though, stress the limits of a purely military approach.
The application of massive firepower has not ended terrorism in Chechnya or in the West Bank, notes Paul Wilkinson, director of the Center for the Study of Terrorism at St. Andrews.
Adds Wilkinson: "Even a superpower can't do it on its own."
Analysts stress a long-term policy of "draining the swamp," ameliorating the sources of terrorism while removing their support.
In the case of Islamic radicalism, such an approach could involve economic assistance to a post-Taliban Afghanistan, a place so wrecked at present that any new military action would just make the rubble bounce some more.
It would require a concerted effort to reach out to those many moderate Islamic clerics who detest terrorism, coupled with a determination to shut down financial support for terrorist networks.
Already Washington has told the Saudi government that the U.S. will no longer tolerate the practice of turning a blind eye to wealthy Saudis who fund extremist groups.
"We're not going to pussyfoot around with them," says a senior State Department official. 
In the next few weeks and months, the rustle of papers that suggest such quiet initiatives will be drowned by the drumbeats of war.
How loud and how long those drums tap out their rhythm of yet more death and destruction remains--like so much about our new war--hidden in the fog.
Monitors have been brought in to oversee the removal of debris from the World Trade Center to fend off organized crime and corruption that could accompany the massive cleanup effort. 
The effort is a precautionary measure meant to "ensure against organized crime or any other insidious interests," said Edward Kuriansky, commissioner of the city's Department of Investigations. 
A grand jury is already investigating whether some scrap metal removed from the disaster site was diverted to mafia-owned businesses rather than shipped to the dump where investigators are picking through the rubble for evidence and DNA. 
And Mayor Rudolph Giuliani had harsh words for people he said had been trying to profit from the attacks by offering to sell debris to victims' families. 
New York officials discussed the corruption monitoring Thursday as the city comptroller provided an update on the economic fallout from the Sept. 11 attacks.
The figures are daunting: The attacks could cost the New York economy $100 billion over the next two years. "
And that assumes the federal government picks up the major expenses here," said David Neustadt, spokesman for Comptroller Alan Hevesi.
"If not, then all bets are off." 
Officials said the most common responses following the trade center attacks have been kindness and generosity, but they want to err on the side of caution to avoid corruption as they monitor the rubble removal. 
Contractors will be assigned monitors who will track equipment and personnel as well set up uniform record-keeping and billing procedures. 
At the site Thursday night, firefighters perched high above the mountains of rubble continued to spray water into the smoldering debris.
Elsewhere, laborers continued to dig by hand for bodies and evidence. 
Although the skyscrapers contained millions of square feet (meters) of office space, crews are finding no desks, telephones, computers or fax machines in the wreckage.
All that exists are large steel girders, chunks of concrete and endless piles of dust. 
"That's the weird thing," said Alan Bennett, a 32-year-old iron worker.
"There's a lot of dead people in there, we know that.
And thousands more made it out, but we haven't seen any sign that life ever existed in those buildings." 
As of Thursday, the number of missing remained at 4,986, while the number of confirmed dead rose to 380. 
The death toll is accompanied by a devastating impact to the New York economy.
Hevesi said the trade center's destruction cost $6.7 billion; $12 billion was lost in computers and other office equipment; rebuilding the complex will cost $5.3 billion; and the city's economy will lose $11 billion in spending by the thousands of trade center victims. 
Hevesi also said 115,300 jobs would be lost this year alone, though that number could be offset by gains in construction and other fields involved in cleanup and rebuilding. 
Congress has stepped in to provide some assistance, giving $20 billion to help with the recovery.
Some of an additional $20 billion authorized for anti-terrorist measures will also end up in New York. 
Copyright 2001
The Associated Press .
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
Rep. Nancy Pelosi, D.-California, took House Republican leaders to task Saturday for their reluctance to push through an airline security bill passed unanimously in the Senate. 
"We need to move forward," Pelosi, elected this week as the House minority whip, said in the Democrats' weekly radio address. "
It is unacceptable to hold America's safety in the sky hostage to the political agenda of a handful in the House of Representatives." 
Republican leaders in the GOP-controlled House have balked over provisions in the bill to make the nation's 28,000 airport screeners and baggage handlers federal employees, saying the provision would only create more bureaucracy. 
Other provisions in the bill are based on recommendations from President Bush, and call for federal marshals on airplanes, increased cockpit security and hijack training for pilots. 
The legislation passed in the Senate on October 11. 
House GOP leaders have said they would insist on a bill that makes the federal government responsible for security but allows privately contracted employees to do the actual screening. 
Yet Pelosi said action is needed quickly.
She noted that the country's economy was struggling before the September 11 terror attacks and has "worsened" since then.
Stronger airline security, she said, "is critical to getting us back to business as usual.
" 
"In Congress, we must take immediate steps to ensure that all of our airlines and airports are safe," she said.
"We must not let airline security fall by the political wayside." 
Pelosi also urged Congress to provide aid for the more than 140,000 airline workers who lost their jobs in the wake of the industry's downturn after the terror attacks. 
"Democrats and Republicans must work together in this challenging time," she said.
"We will comfort those who lost their jobs, and ensure the safety of the American people."
French President Jacques Chirac met with President Bush Tuesday and promised his country would support the United States in the fight against terrorism. 
"I want to tell President Bush, who is my friend, that we bring you the total solidarity of France and the French people.
It is a solidarity of the heart," Chirac said in a brief news conference before the new leaders began their talks. 
"We are completely determined to fight by your side this new type of evil, of absolute evil, which is terrorism.
France is prepared and available to discuss all means to fight and eradicate this evil." 
Bush praised the French president as a "man of vision" and said he was glad for France's help in this "new kind of war." 
"This war will require determination and patience," Bush said.
"People who love freedom, such as Jacques Chirac and the people of France, will join us.
I am confident of that." 
The French president balked at Bush's description of the situation, however. 
"I don't know if we should use the word 'war,'" Chirac said.
"Now we are faced with a conflict of a completely new nature, a conflict that is attempting to destroy human rights, freedom, the dignity of man, and I believe that everything must be done to safeguard these values of civilization." 
He said France will do everything necessary to help the United States eradicate terrorism. 
"I would also like to add that practically all of the leaders of the world are following this line," Chirac said. 
Bush said the "new war" is not about taking territory, but a fight for liberty and freedom. 
"There are no beaches to storm, there are no islands to conquer, there are no battle lines to be drawn," Bush said. 
"It's a war that's going to take an international effort.
It's going to take all of us to gather the necessary intelligence, the necessary information, to be able to find the location of terrorists, to work with governments to smoke them out of their safe houses to get them moving, and then have the courage to bring them to justice." 
Chirac's visit was scheduled well in advance of the terrorist attacks last Tuesday. 
On Sunday Blair called on Palestinians to reject bin Laden's extreme form of Islam and join the fight against the Saudi dissident and his organisation. 
Blair -- writing in the Jerusalem-based Arab newspaper al-Quds -- said the U.S. attacks were not based on faith but a desire for power through inflicting terror. 
"Osama bin Laden likes to pretend he speaks for the Palestinian cause," he wrote. 
"He likes to pretend that he is driven by faith.
Neither of those claims, it seems to me, are true. 
"They are a cover for his real motivation, which is power; power which he yields through terror. "
Let us be clear.
If we don't take a stand against Osama bin Laden and his puppet regime in Kabul, he will seek to overthrow other Muslim states and put in place regimes of fear, terror and intolerance," Blair wrote. 
"The question Muslims around the world have to ask themselves is:
Do you want to live under the sort of regime we see today in Kabul?
Because that is what bin Laden and al Qaeda want for you," he said. 
Bin Laden has threatened the U.S. with terror until the Palestinians have found peace in their conflict with Israel, and he has accused the world of remaining silent in the face of bloodshed in the West Bank and Gaza. 
Washington has been pressuring Israel and the Palestinians to end a year of fighting and to revive peace talks as it tries to keep Arab countries in its anti-terrorist alliance. 
Former U.S. Assistant Secretary of State James Rubin told CNN: "Since we want the Arab world to be supporting us on another question -- the war on terrorism -- it would certainly make it easier to have things quiet on the Middle East front." 
Blair has undertaken a round of shuttle diplomacy in an attempt to shore up the alliance. 
UK Foreign Secretary Jack Staw said on Monday Britain wanted to see the creation of a Palestinian state as part of a long-term solution to the Middle Eastern conflict. 
He stressed that this was a long-standing aspiration of the UK government, and was not adopted in response to the events of September 11 in the U.S. 
Britain wanted to see both Israel and the Palestinian Authority adopt the recommendations of former U.S. senator George Mitchell in his peace plan, said Straw. 
"Everybody knows that there is absolutely no justification whatever for what happened on September 11, but people also understand -- and it is a point understood by people inside the Israeli Cabinet as well -- that at the same time, we have got to reduce the tensions within which terrorism breeds and terrorism can hide," he told the BBC. 
"That is why the meeting this morning between Chairman Arafat and our prime minister and the meeting I will be having with Chairman Arafat later in the day are part of a continuing process to try to secure peace in the Middle East, which is the area of the greatest conflict and tension across the world."
Knowledgeable U.S. officials said they have evidence the Russian airliner that crashed Thursday into the Black Sea was shot down by a Ukrainian surface-to-air missile fired during military exercises. 
"We believe this was a tragic accident caused by a military exercise gone awry," said a US official. 
The Sibir Airlines Tu-154 with 77 people aboard was en route from Israel to Siberia. 
U.S. officials said the plane was downed by an SA-5 surface-to-air missile fired from a shore battery during the largest scale Ukrainian military exercises in some years. 
The plane started its journey in Tel Aviv, Israel, bound for Novisibersk, Russia.
Officials in Israel and Russia said they feared the crash could have been caused by terrorists.
An Armenian pilot flying in the vicinity said he saw the plane explode in midair. 
The Sabir pilot gave air traffic controllers no indication of any problem, according to Russian civil aviation authorities.
They said because of that they suspect that whatever happened, happened quickly. 
Vasily Yurchuk, spokesman for the Russian Ministry of Emergency Situations, said the plane went down 185 kilometers (115 miles) from the Russian coastal city of Adler, near the Georgian border, The Associated Press reported. 
A Russian emergency ministry official told Reuters the plane went down 190 kilometers (118 miles) south of the Black Sea port of Novorossiisk. 
Reports said the wreckage of the aircraft was found about 280 kilometers (174 miles) from the coast of the Black Sea. 
Kostyntun Khivlemko, a spokesman for the Ukrainian Defense Ministry in Kiev, denied the plane was shot down by a Ukrainian missile.
He said the missiles being used had a range of only10 kilometers, and the plane was more than 300 kilometers away. 
Russian President Vladimir Putin also said he doubted whether Ukrainian missiles would have had the range to hit the plane. 
Nevertheless, U.S. officials said they had "convincing" indications the plane was hit by a Ukrainian SA-5 missile. 
Russia was observing the Ukrainian exercises, but not taking part, Putin said. 
His administration was in communication with the Ukraine government, but it was premature to make any judgments, he added.
A careful investigation would be needed. 
Speaking on condition of anonymity, one U.S. official said there was prior notification by the Ukrainian government that airspace had been set aside for military exercises. 
It was not yet clear whether the jet was inside or outside that area at the time of the crash, the U.S. official said. 
There were reports the plane had stopped in Bulgaria en route to Siberia, but Bulgarian presidential press secretary Nerry Terzieva said the jet neither stopped in Bulgaria and nor entered Bulgarian airspace. 
Israel, which operates some of the world's most stringent aviation safety measures, canceled all takeoffs from Ben-Gurion Airport in Tel Aviv immediately after news of the crash for fear it may have been a terrorist attack. 
The move came before the Ukrainian missile theory emerged.
Departure flights were allowed to resume four hours after the crash.
In-bound flights had not been affected. 
The Russian Transport Ministry and domestic security service said the pilot of an Armenian An-24 plane flying near the Tu-154 reported to Russian air traffic controllers in Rostov-on-Don, southern Russia, that he had seen an explosion aboard the plane. 
The pilot, Garik Ovanisian, was quoted by The AP as saying: "I saw the explosion on the plane, which was above me at an altitude of 11,000 meters [36,300 feet] above the Black Sea. 
"The plane fell into the sea, and there was another explosion in the sea.
After that I saw a big white spot on the sea
and I had the impression that oil was burning." 
Russian officials said 51 of the passengers were Israelis and 15 were Russians.
All 11 crew members were Russians. 
Russian officials said apparently there were no survivors. 
An investigation would be led by Vladimir Rushailo, head of the presidential security council, and attempts to retrieve the flight's data recorders would be made. 
A Russian search and rescue team was sent immediately to the site to look for survivors, as well as divers to find possible evidence. 
Putin said on Russian television that "every shred of evidence" had to be retrieved from the crash site as "quickly as possible.
" 
"We need to collect everything there -- get the experts examining everything," he said. 
"If the depth allows, we need to get divers searching for the flight data recorder.
We need it badly."
"Details of their meeting are being investigated," Gross said, adding that checks were being made to see if Atta had made other visits to the country. 
Atta, an Egyptian who studied in Germany, is believed to have been the pilot of American Airlines Flight 11, the first plane to smash into the World Trade Center. 
Asked if Atta might have been using a different name, Aziz told the L.A. Times, "Even if such an incident had taken place, it doesn't mean anything.
Any diplomat in any mission might meet people in a restaurant here or there and talk to them, which is meaningless.
If that person turned out to be something else, that doesn't mean he had a connection with what that person did later." 
Another Czech official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, told The Associated Press news agency that intelligence agents were checking whether Ani had also met a second hijacker. 
Government officials told AP earlier this month that Ani was under surveillance because he was suspected of being involved in a plot to attack the headquarters of Radio Free Europe. 
The radio station, partially funded by Washington, broadcasts to Iran and Iraq.
Baghdad has called that an act of aggression. 
Intelligence sources tell CNN there is no known link beween the Prague meeting and the anthrax attacks since September 11.
NATO Secretary-General George Robertson pledged the alliance's steadfast support at the heart of what he called a "global coalition against the most evil criminals of our age" during an appearance Wednesday with President Bush at the White House. 
"We stand shoulder to shoulder in a new kind of struggle and a struggle that we have to win," Robertson said, standing next to Bush in the Rose Garden. 
"These terrorists are not 10 feet tall.
They are not insuperable.
They are not unvanquishable, but we are.
We can win, and we certainly will win," he said. 
The meeting between Robertson and Bush comes as NATO is taking on a more visible role in support of the U.S. war against terrorism.
The 19-nation alliance, of which the United States is a member, already has deployed a naval force to the eastern Mediterranean Sea and sent surveillance and early warning aircraft to patrol the skies over the United States. 
The naval force is part of NATO's immediate response forces and includes ships from Britain, Germany, Greece, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Turkey and the United States. 
The deployment to the United States, which is expected to be completed within days, is the first time NATO forces have been used directly to support the continental United States.
The NATO planes will free up U.S. aircraft to support operations in Afghanistan and elsewhere. 
The first of five NATO Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS) aircraft headed Tuesday for the United States. 
Bush called the deployment an "unprecedented display of friendship." 
"This has never happened before, that NATO has come to help defend our country, but it happened in this time of need and for that we are grateful," Bush said.
"Together, we're building a very strong coalition against terror, and NATO is the cornerstone of that coalition." 
The president emphasized that support for the U.S.-led attacks on Taliban and al Qaeda targets in Afghanistan spreads far beyond NATO's member nations. 
Forces from Britain, also a NATO member, took part in the initial round of attacks on targets in Afghanistan on Sunday. 
Bush noted that Russia is sharing intelligence and offering "strong diplomatic support," the Organization of American States invoked its own collective defense clause, and Japan and South Korea have offered logistical and other support.
And forces from Australia and New Zealand, he said, are on standby if needed.
Nations in Africa also have pledged various kinds of support. 
He said that China's President Jiang Zemin expressed "his desire to join us in fighting terrorist activities." 
And perhaps to counter efforts by al Qaeda and the Taliban to paint fighting as an attack by the United States on Islam, Bush noted that there has been support from the Middle East.
In particular, he cited Jordan, Egypt and Saudi Arabia as offering law enforcement, intelligence and other cooperation. 
"In short, many nations understand what NATO expressed -- that an attack on us is really an attack on legitimate governments and on freedom," Bush said. 
This week's deployment is the most visible signal of NATO's first ever implementation of Article 5 of the 1949 Washington Treaty, which recognizes that an attack against one member should be considered an attack against all, Robertson said Wednesday. 
NATO's 19 members also are providing access to European allied airspace, airports and airfields, and intelligence.
And they will continue to build on cooperation with the United Nations in providing peacekeepers.
It took the worst terrorist attacks in our nation's history, but now the secret is out: Republicans love big government. 
Even though, like all Republican candidates, he ran for office promising to reduce the size of the federal government, George Bush has made it even bigger by creating the Office of Homeland Security -- a new Cabinet-level office headed by former Pennsylvania Governor Tom Ridge.
It's a bad idea and it's bound to fail. 
Bush, in fact, is acting more and more like the stereotypical Democrats he railed against. 
Their solution to every problem, he used to complain, is to spend more money and expand the role of government -- which he has done, by executive order.
So, this time, he has no one to blame but himself. 
You almost have to feel sorry for Tom Ridge.
He wanted to be vice-president.
He did, in fact, make it to the short list, only to be passed over for Dick Cheney.
Now he finally gets a big federal job, but it's a meaningless one.
His new office has two fundamental flaws: it's not needed; and, even if it were needed, it hasn't been given the tools necessary to carry out its mandate. 
Granted, we Americans must do a better job defending ourselves against terrorism.
That's self-evident.
But it's also self-evident why the terrorists were so successful on September 11.
There were plenty of government agencies responsible for security -- they just weren't doing their job. 
The breakdown in America's once-vaunted security apparatus is astounding.
We were provided plenty of clues that an attack on the United States was likely; but the CIA and the FBI simply ignored them. 
Philippine authorities warned us six years ago of terrorist plans to destroy public buildings using hijacked commercial airliners.
We did nothing.
Two of the hijackers were on the FBI's most-wanted list.
Yet they lived openly in the United States for five years: renting apartments, taking flying lessons, going to bars and strip clubs, using their credit cards -- and the FBI never found them.
The CIA had thousands of documents intercepted from terrorist organizations, but they were all in Arabic and never translated. 
Equally scary is our lack of intelligence in terrorist circles.
As investigative journalist Seymour Hersh wrote in the October 8 edition of The New Yorker, what's needed is the old-fashioned man-in-Havana, relocated to Kabul: "Today, in Afghanistan, or anywhere in the Middle East or South Asia, a C.I.A. operative would have to speak the local language and be able to blend in." 
Then, based on interviews with many CIA agents, Hersh adds the chilling kicker: "It's possible that there isn't a single such officer operating today inside Islamic fundamentalist circles." 
Clearly, the FBI and the CIA screwed up.
Big time.
But, (at the risk of sounding like a Republican), that doesn't mean we need more big government.
That means we need to shake up existing agencies, fire the idiots who were asleep at the switch and put in new leaders who will carry out their responsibilities. 
However, if you're going to make the mistake of creating a new government agency to protect the homeland, at least you should do it through legislation, in order to give it all the tools it needs to do the job.
President Bush did not.
Instead, by executive order, he created a paper tiger. 
As director of Homeland Security, Tom Ridge has no teeth.
He is a Cabinet officer without an agency.
There is no legislation giving him money or power.
He is responsible for coordinating the work of 46 different government agencies, with no control over any of them.
He can't force them to share information.
He can't add to or subtract from their budgets.
He can't call them up and order them to do anything.
All he can do is persuade and cajole.
Good luck. 
The White House counters that, even without legislative authority, Ridge will be effective because he is a friend of the president's and has an office right down the hall from the Oval Office.
Nonsense.
That's pure spin.
Wait till the first time Ridge tries giving orders to Defense Secretary Don Rumsfeld or Attorney General John Ashcroft.
He'll wish he were back in Pennsylvania. 
Under Bush's plan, the Homeland Security Czar has the same rank and power as the Drug Czar.
That says it all.
We know what a colossal failure the war on illegal drugs has been. 
We can expect no more from the new war on domestic terrorism.
Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Ridge, a Vietnam War combat veteran appointed by President Bush to head the newly created Cabinet post of the Office of Homeland Security, says he will resign his current job on October 5. 
"It is an honor to serve your country at anytime, but now, more so than ever," Ridge said from his state's capital of Harrisburg, shortly after he attended Bush's Thursday night address to the nation in Washington earlier in the evening. 
Bush announced the new post in his televised speech to Congress, in which he detailed the long battle against terrorism ahead, following the deadly hijack attacks September 11 that left thousands dead in New York, Washington and Pennsylvania. 
"Today, dozens of federal departments and agencies, as well as state and local governments, have responsibilities affecting homeland security.
These efforts must be coordinated at the highest level," the president said in making his announcement. 
Ridge said that because this is a new position, the duties and scope of his new assignment are not all spelled out, but it involves coordinating and creating a strategic plan for homeland defense. 
The governor said the offer for the post came to him Wednesday in phone call from Bush Chief of Staff Andrew Card and later, Vice President Dick Cheney. 
"I think it's all right to admit that I'm saddened that this job is even necessary, but it is necessary, so I will give it everything that I have," Ridge said. 
Lt. Gov. Mark Schweiker will take over as Pennsylvania governor in a transition Ridge predicted will be "seamless." 
"To the people of Pennsylvania, I hope you've detected over the past seven years, I love my job and I love you," he said.
"I've been honored, proud and privileged to serve you." 
Ridge, 56, was sworn in as governor in 1995.
He was re-elected in 1998, and was to serve until 2003. 
He was mentioned as a potential running mate in Bob Dole's 1996 campaign and in Bush's 2000 campaign, before Bush decided on Cheney. 
Ridge fought in the Vietnam War in the infantry and received the Bronze Star for Valor, according to the governor's Web site. 
He graduated from local Roman Catholic schools, worked summers as a union laborer and attended Harvard University on a scholarship.
He graduated with honors in 1967 and enrolled in Dickinson Law School before being drafted at the end of his first year. 
Ridge's social political agenda has included welfare reform and a special legislative session on crime that resulted in a so-called three-strikes law and a faster death-penalty process. 
Ridge signed more than 200 execution warrants since he became governor in 1995.
Nigerian police shot dead at least one man as fresh violence erupted in the northern city of Kano Monday, the fourth day of Muslim-Christian fighting. 
Police say 18 have been killed in the clashes since Friday.
Community leaders put the figure at more than 200 dead. 
Witnesses said police, under orders since Saturday to shoot rioters on sight, fired at a young man at point blank range as police dispersed a crowd said to be planning reprisal attacks in the teeming district of Tudun Wada. 
"Police killed one of the nasty boys causing problems in our area," said Tudun Wada resident Esther Isaac, 24, who witnessed the killing. 
"He was telling people they should continue fighting.
The mobile police shot him and the others in his group ran away," Isaac said. 
Fear of revenge killings have swept the ancient city since clashes erupted Friday after Muslims protested against U.S. military action in Afghanistan. 
The official death toll, which police say is based on the number of bodies recovered from the streets, has been hotly contested by community leaders. 
Nigeria is grappling with a rising wave of ethnic or religious bloodshed in which well over 2,000 people have died since army rule ended in Africa's most populous nation in 1999. 
The introduction of strict Islamic sharia law in parts of predominantly Muslim northern Nigeria, despite opposition from non-Muslims, triggered violence early last year. 
But the sharia crisis appears to have only compounded historical ethnic and regional rivalries blamed for a devastating civil war in the late 1960s in which more than a million people died. 
Hundreds of people died in Muslim-Christian fighting in the central city of Jos last month and police are battling ethnic unrest in three other northern states. 
Kano Governor Rabiu Musa Kwankwaso summoned a meeting of ethnic and religious leaders Monday amid reports that warring parties were regrouping. 
"Your presence will be highly appreciated, considering the prevailing security issues in the state," said the governor's invitation letter. 
Residents spent a fourth day huddled in their homes with reports of food running short.
Shops and city markets have been shut since Friday.
There has been no electricity or water in many working class districts in four days. 
In Sabon Gari, home to most non-Muslim immigrants, community leaders surrounded by heavily armed troops announced on a public address system that all business would be suspended until after the meeting with the governor. 
Boniface Ibekwe, president of the large Christian Ibo community that dominates the retail trade, also used the loudspeakers to call on the Ibo to leave the streets. 
"No Ibo man should be thinking of business.
Go back to your houses.
They have guaranteed us your security.
But if there are any further attacks we will know what action to take," he said. 
Muslim leaders also counted their losses after the mayhem on Friday and Saturday, when churches and mosques were torched. 
Sabon Gari's Ahmadiya mosque was one of those burned. 
Mosque official Kazeem Ali, a Yoruba from the southwest, and chief Imam Mohammed Ibrahim, said they were doing a count of burned mosques and had already visited 16.
Eight smaller prayer houses had also been destroyed. 
"We want to hold an emergency meeting so we can know what to do to the people who burned our mosque," Ali said.
"Look at the damage.
This is our school.
How can we bring our children here?" 
The floor of the mosque was covered in rubble and the tin roof was a twisted wreck.
Neighboring buildings were wrecked. 
Monday's fighting erupted after Kano residents spent a third night under curfew, with troops in armoured vehicles patrolling deserted streets dotted with scorched cars and houses. 
Residents said a number of people had been shot elsewhere by police or soldiers since the shoot-on-sight order was first given Saturday.
A community leader told Reuters Sunday he knew of eight people rounded up by troops and shot.
There was no independent confirmation of those accounts. 
Copyright 2001 Reuters .
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Ridge, a Vietnam War combat veteran appointed by President Bush to head the newly created Cabinet post of the Office of Homeland Security, says he will resign his current job on October 5. 
"It is an honor to serve your country at anytime, but now, more so than ever," Ridge said from his state's capital of Harrisburg, shortly after he attended Bush's Thursday night address to the nation in Washington earlier in the evening. 
Bush announced the new post in his televised speech to Congress, in which he detailed the long battle against terrorism ahead, following the deadly hijack attacks September 11 that left thousands dead in New York, Washington and Pennsylvania. 
"Today, dozens of federal departments and agencies, as well as state and local governments, have responsibilities affecting homeland security.
These efforts must be coordinated at the highest level," the president said in making his announcement. 
Ridge said that because this is a new position, the duties and scope of his new assignment are not all spelled out, but it involves coordinating and creating a strategic plan for homeland defense. 
The governor said the offer for the post came to him Wednesday in phone call from Bush Chief of Staff Andrew Card and later, Vice President Dick Cheney. 
"I think it's all right to admit that I'm saddened that this job is even necessary, but it is necessary, so I will give it everything that I have," Ridge said. 
Lt. Gov. Mark Schweiker will take over as Pennsylvania governor in a transition Ridge predicted will be "seamless." 
"To the people of Pennsylvania, I hope you've detected over the past seven years, I love my job and I love you," he said.
"I've been honored, proud and privileged to serve you." 
Ridge, 56, was sworn in as governor in 1995.
He was re-elected in 1998, and was to serve until 2003. 
He was mentioned as a potential running mate in Bob Dole's 1996 campaign and in Bush's 2000 campaign, before Bush decided on Cheney. 
Ridge fought in the Vietnam War in the infantry and received the Bronze Star for Valor, according to the governor's Web site. 
He graduated from local Roman Catholic schools, worked summers as a union laborer and attended Harvard University on a scholarship.
He graduated with honors in 1967 and enrolled in Dickinson Law School before being drafted at the end of his first year. 
Ridge's social political agenda has included welfare reform and a special legislative session on crime that resulted in a so-called three-strikes law and a faster death-penalty process. 
Ridge signed more than 200 execution warrants since he became governor in 1995.
Conservatives hate to meddle in the markets.
So it would be hard to find a more unlikely advocate for federal price controls than California Congressman Duncan Hunter, whose voting record nearly every year gets a 100% rating from the American Conservative Union.
But when the owner of a small metal shop in El Cajon showed Hunter his December electric bill--$115,000 for the month, four times what the man had been paying before the state's electricity crisis began--Hunter changed his mind.
"I came to the conclusion that this wasn't free enterprise," the San Diego County Republican says.
On the day George W. Bush was inaugurated, Hunter introduced a bill authorizing the new Administration to impose caps on "unjust and unreasonable prices in the electric-energy market." 
The Administration wasn't interested.
For the past six months, Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney have rarely missed a chance to say what a huge mistake government controls of California energy costs would be.
But the argument has been slapping up against an obvious political problem: Bush's free-market principles mirror the financial interests of his backers in the energy industry--top executives who are cashing in stock options for tens and hundreds of millions of dollars while their corporate profits are tripling.
"The consequence of the inaction has been a massive transfer of wealth from the ordinary citizens of California to rich energy barons in Houston, Charlotte and Atlanta," California's Democratic Governor, Gray Davis, told TIME.
The state's wholesale energy bill grew from $7 billion in 1999 to $27 billion last year, and could reach $55 billion this year. 
With 54 electoral votes, California isn't used to getting the cold shoulder from Washington.
But if the plight of the state's ratepayers hasn't forced Bush to rethink the wisdom of price caps, the plight of its Republicans may have.
Control of the House in next year's midterm elections could depend on half a dozen endangered G.O.P. seats in California.
That's why House majority whip Tom DeLay told Bush two weeks ago that he shouldn't count on Republicans to beat back price caps.
There may be collateral damage at the other end of the Capitol as well.
Sources say Senate minority leader Trent Lott has warned Bush aides that California's problems could infect 10 Western states, endangering Colorado's Wayne Allard, Idaho's Larry Craig and Oregon's Gordon Smith.
And while Bush may be writing off California's votes, plenty of Democrats covet them, including putative presidential contender Joe Lieberman, whose first act as a new committee chairman last week was to launch hearings into the state's energy crisis. 
So Bush is in a bind--caught between his principles and moneymen on one side and the prospect of summertime blackouts, spiraling prices and mutinous legislators on the other.
He needs a way out, and may have found one.
This week a little-known agency called the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission meets in a special session, its first with two new Bush appointees in place.
For the past year, FERC has ignored pleas for sweeping electricity price controls in California and other Western states.
Last fall, at a congressional subcommittee hearing in San Diego, chairman Curtis Hebert suggested that consumers should learn to live with higher electricity prices.
"If the truth kills Granny," he declared, "let her die.
" When things got really bad last spring, FERC limited prices only during the worst power emergencies.
But this week FERC is expected to approve full-time price controls. 
Why is FERC relenting?
The argument against price caps is that they do infinitely more harm than good, as Jimmy Carter and Richard Nixon discovered when they allowed government bureaucrats to clog the gears of a free market.
Price caps, says Energy Secretary Spence Abraham, are merely a formula for "an increase in the scope, duration and frequency of blackouts." 
But Davis, along with virtually the entire California congressional delegation, Democratic and Republican, says the market now is anything but free.
It is being manipulated, in their view, by energy companies that have wrung billions out of California consumers by squeezing supply to create artificial shortages.
Why else, they say, would California power suppliers like Enron Corp.--
a Houston-based trading giant headed by one of Bush's top donors and informal energy advisers--be seeing their revenues jump 281% in the first quarter?
Even a respected free-marketeer like Alfred Kahn, the father of airline deregulation, has had enough.
"The notion that caps automatically interfere with the increase of supply in the electric industry is absurd," he says. 
Word of FERC's expected action comes as Californians are getting a break from towering prices.
Last Wednesday, Davis says, the state paid only $29 million for its power--a sharp drop from the $100 million a day it spent in mid-May.
While FERC credits its own emergency measures for the lower costs, Davis political adviser Garry South says it is more likely the result of unseasonably cool weather and power companies "trying to lay low until the posse passes by." 
For Bush, the beauty of having the nominally independent FERC send an ems team to Granny's house is that it allows him to keep his distance and take credit at the same time--to escape the bind without seeming to try.
At a frosty meeting with California lawmakers last week, Cheney repeated his opposition to price controls even as he suggested help from FERC could be on the way.
The White House believes in the free market, but it will crow this week that FERC acted because Bush had called on it to be vigilant. "
He has not been looking for the short-term political fix but addressing long-term problems," says Gerry Parsky, who chaired Bush's California campaign.
"But what he has done is tell FERC to do its job." 
Having it both ways requires some semantic gymnastics.
FERC draws a distinction between "price caps," which impose a maximum allowable price, and the more flexible "price mitigation," which sets prices based on a formula that factors in producers' costs. 
Fair enough.
But the White House is taking pains to get its story straight.
At a meeting in economic adviser Larry Lindsey's office, aides were told to use the poll-approved "price caps" in place of the harsher "price controls.
" Republicans on Capitol Hill are thumbing through their thesauruses for other ways to describe the abrupt change of course.
To some, the idea of telling their allies in the energy industry to give back their "unearned enrichment" seems more palatable than slapping them for "price gouging."
And for those who find "caps" too strong to take, there's always "market mitigation." 
But how they spell relief won't matter if FERC's action doesn't work.
"It's better than nothing but not nearly as attractive as it sounds," says Davis, who will tell Lieberman's committee the same thing this week.
"The way around it is quite obvious.
Generators simply sell the product to a middle person--which they do anyway--and that marketer has no obligations under the order."
Also, the order will not get back the $7 billion California estimates it has been overcharged by electricity suppliers since last May. 
Even if FERC's order proves effective, Republicans will have salvage work to do.
Polls show Californians disapprove of how Bush has handled their biggest problem; some even think he's out to get them.
Bush and Davis talked past each other during a meeting in Los Angeles last month, when Bush was on his first presidential trip to the state.
But real negotiations were under way elsewhere.
Sources tell TIME that political adviser Karl Rove met privately with outgoing Republican mayor Richard Riordan to press him to enter next year's race for Governor against Davis.
Rove and top Republicans have kept the pressure on, letting Riordan know that Bush moneymen are waiting with checks if he gets in, and sharing G.O.P. polls with him that show Davis may have been fatally wounded by his handling of the crisis.
While the Governor claims he inherited the state's deregulation mess, even Democrats accuse him of ignoring it until it was too late.
A strong challenge by Riordan could not only unseat the Democratic Governor but also create coattails big enough to keep Republican House members in office. 
Californians will be getting a preview of that war this week as a group called the American Taxpayers Alliance begins airing TV ads featuring fuzzy closeups of a robotic-looking Davis, claiming he is to blame for the state's energy problems.
Although the A.T.A. styles itself an "issue advocacy group," funding for the ads comes from, among hundreds of other corporations, a major power generator called Reliant Energy, one of the companies California officials accuse of price gouging.
(James Baker, who headed the Bush recount effort in Florida, is a director, and chairman Steve Letbetter was a top Bush fund raiser.)
Republican sources tell TIME that Scott Reed, the longtime G.O.P. activist who heads A.T.A., hopes to raise $25 million to keep the ads running.
Bush outside adviser Ed Gillespie, an Enron lobbyist, is raising a separate $500,000 war chest for ads attacking price caps. 
Not that Davis is without resources.
He is paying former Al Gore strategists Mark Fabiani and Chris Lehane $30,000 a month of taxpayer money to handle the p.r.
crisis inside the energy crisis.
That's despite the fact that Fabiani and Lehane--known as "masters of disaster" for their work at the White House during the Clinton scandals--are consultants to Southern California Edison, a utility at the eye of the storm. 
California is only part of the G.O.P.'s energy problem.
Bush's plan to boost production nationally is in trouble.
In mid-April, internal House polls showed the Republicans 3 points behind the Democrats on the question of which party could be trusted more on energy issues.
Two weeks ago, they'd fallen to 15 points behind.
Republicans fear that will only get worse as Lieberman and two other committee chairmen convene hearings on Bush's energy policies--and his friends in the industry.
Both state and federal authorities are probing allegations of market manipulation by a variety of power generators and pipeline operators. 
Even if federal regulators take some of the sting out of California's energy prices, tight supplies and high temperatures will ensure that sporadic blackouts continue.
It's hard to tell who will have the hotter summer--Californians, their Governor, energy executives or George W. Bush.
Three people were killed and six injured after a crash outside a Danish road tunnel set several cars ablaze. 
Police said a truck transporting pigs crashed into the cars outside the Guldborgsund tunnel, 120 kilometers (75 miles) south of the Danish capital of Copenhagen. 
The cause of the accident was not immediately known, although Danish public radio said there was thick fog with a visibility of 10 metrers when the accident happened at 9:40 a.m. (0740 GMT). 
Nine cars were burning and dead pigs were scattered across the highway, according to the radio report quoterd by the Associated Press. 
Several ambulances and fire department vehicles were at the scene, the news agency said. 
The tunnel was immediately closed to traffic. 
Vehicles were diverted across nearby bridges that span across the 200 metre wide Guldborgsund strait. 
The tunnel links the islands of Falster and Lolland.
It is part of the E4 highway from Copenhagen to Roedby, the port for ferry sailings from Denmark to northern Germany.
SAN'A, Yemen
-- Two new suspects have been arrested in the bombing of the USS Cole, Yemen's president said in an interview broadcast Sunday. 
But Yemen has not yet found evidence linking Saudi dissident Osama bin Laden to the October 12 Cole attack that killed 17 U.S. sailors. 
"They are Yemenis, among those that used to go to Afghanistan," President Ali Abdullah Saleh told the Arabic TV network Middle East Broadcasting of the two new suspects.
"They are still under investigation and we will see what exactly their link was to the bombing of the USS Cole." 
Saleh gave the suspects' names as Mohammed Ahmed al-Ahdal and Ahmed Mohammed Amin, and said they were being interrogated. 
Saleh said the primary suspect in the Cole attack -- Mohammed el-Harazi -- is believed to be in Afghanistan, as well as an alleged accomplice. 
The Afghan connection, he said, has led U.S. investigators to believe the attack is linked to bin Laden.
Bin Laden, also accused by the U.S. of masterminding the 1998 bombings of two U.S. embassies in Africa, has denied involvement in the attack on the USS Cole. 
There has been no claim to the Cole attack considered credible by investigators. 
The Arab suspects were detained two days ago when they returned to Yemen from Afghanistan, Saleh said. 
He said the case of six detainees had been sent to a Yemeni prosecutor, but that U.S. officials had asked for the trial to be delayed until the main suspects are arrested. 
The new arrests bring the total number of men to be tried in the Cole case to eight.
The trial is expected to take place in Aden, the Yemeni port where the ship was attacked. 
"The U.S. administration has asked us to delay it because they want the entire investigation to be finished before the trial," Saleh said. 
The president added that a team of Yemeni investigators was traveling to Germany where U.S. sailors injured in the blast were treated.
The team was expected to go to the United States where investigators would exchange information with the FBI. 
CNN Correspondent Rym Brahimi, The Associated Press and Reuters contributed to this report. 
Note: Pages will open in a new browser window External sites are not endorsed by CNN Interactive.
When Senator Jim Jeffords bolted from the Republican Party last week, throwing control of the Senate to the Democrats and reprogramming the Capitol power grid, it took almost no time for the first signs of the new order to appear.
There was White House Counsel Alberto Gonzalez cooling his heels outside the Senate chamber until Democrat Patrick Leahy, now the presumptive chairman of the Judiciary Committee, could spare a moment to meet with him.
There was the business lobbying group known as Arctic Power, quietly canceling a 10-state, $500,000 radio ad blitz designed to sell Memorial Day motorists on President Bush's plan to drill for oil in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in Alaska.
There were the two dozen tripods set up a full hour before Tom Daschle made his first march down the Capitol steps as Senate majority leader--a striking change from the single C-SPAN camera that used to cover his news conferences.
And finally, there was Senator Don Nickles gazing at the sign saying ASSISTANT MAJORITY LEADER that will no longer greet him when he enters his office each day.
"I like that sign," he said ruefully. 
A Senator's decision to leave his party is a small tectonic shift, but in the fragile geology of an evenly divided Senate, Jeffords' decision shook the ground, rattled the windows, wrecked the walls and tossed the furniture.
What made the shift worse was that it happened in the middle of what was supposed to have been George W. Bush's most triumphant week since the Inauguration.
His signature tax cut was set to clear Congress, and his other big agenda item, education reform, passed the House.
Republicans expected to go home to their Memorial Day parades basking in the first great accomplishments of the Bush era. 
Then the ground buckled.
Was it a one-man earthquake or an electoral aftershock?
Having lost the popular vote and pulled the closest of victories from the rubble of Florida, Bush built his high-rise presidency dangerously close to the fault line.
He governed as though he had a mandate, muscled his agenda through Congress by picking off a few conservative Democrats and ignoring the rest, and punished those who defied him.
He could get away with it because all the lawmaking horsepower was in Republican control, and it seemed to be working for him--until Jeffords tore his high-rise down.
Now, Daschle told TIME, the balance of power is "probably more in keeping with what the American people intended." 
A new TIME/CNN poll suggests he may be right: 45% of those polled believe the country will be better off with the Senate in Democratic hands, while 36% prefer Republican control, and 19% aren't sure.
But this balancing act may also be a formula for gridlock, with each side able to block the other but neither able to push its priorities.
If no one budges, "we're all losers," Daschle said. 
How did this happen?
Bush was determined not to make his father's fatal mistake of neglecting the conservative Republican base.
Instead, he may have repeated the near fatal one Bill Clinton made in his first two years in office.
Having run as a centrist who could forge a new bipartisan middle, Bush--like Clinton--started governing in a way that seemed rather to cater to his party's extreme.
Where Clinton had gays in the military and Hillarycare, Bush had Arctic drilling, global warming, a Vice President who scoffs at conservation and a hard-right Attorney General, John Ashcroft.
As Jeffords announced his decision to become an independent, the Senator who traces his family's Republican roots back to the days of Lincoln said, "Looking ahead, I see more and more instances where I will disagree with the President on very fundamental issues--the issues of choice, the direction of the judiciary, tax and spending decisions, missile defense, energy and the environment and a host of other issues, large and small." 
What forced Clinton back to the center, of course, was the landslide 1994 election that turned both houses of Congress over to the Republicans for the first time in 40 years.
He resculpted his presidency in the image of his campaign, working budget deals with the Republicans, passing welfare reform with them, leaving his party behind when it wouldn't come along. 
Now that Bush has suffered a one-man version of 1994, some moderate politicians are hoping he will make a similar mid-course correction.
But for now at least, the Bush White House rejects the comparison and promises no changes.
This was no national referendum, Administration officials say, just one wobbly liberal who decided to walk off the end of the pier--perhaps, they suggest, to salvage a chairmanship he was slated to lose in 18 months under Senate rules.
"This is a guy who said he found it impossible to support an agenda that the President has spent two years talking about," says Bush strategist Karl Rove.
And it is true that on the issue that Jeffords cares most about--education--Bush has moved to the left, cutting deals with Ted Kennedy and abandoning vouchers.
White House communications director Karen Hughes says Jeffords "was quite comfortable remaining in the Republican Party when the leaders talked about abolishing the Department of Education, but he's not comfortable with a President committed to education." 
Those arguments ignore the fact that many of Bush's most conservative agenda items were hidden away in the campaign's fine print and covered over by his big messages about moderation and helping the little guy.
His compassionate rhetoric masked his conservatism, but five months of decision making have pulled off the mask. 
If all that has just dawned on Jeffords, he has plenty of company.
The TIME/CNN poll shows public disapproval of the job Bush is doing has climbed 14 points since early February, to 38%; nearly half of those polled say they are somewhat or very unlikely to vote for him next time--about the same percentage that felt that way about Clinton at this point in his first term. 
Rove and others insist there will be no change of plan.
Some Republicans were even claiming that this was no big deal, that they could still pick off the Democrats they needed and would now have someone to blame when they couldn't.
But plans are already in place to soften Bush's image on energy and the environment, largely through the sort of public events that worked so well at marketing him during the campaign.
White House strategists are also planning some symbolic overtures to G.O.P. moderates in the coming weeks to tamp down any rebellion Jeffords might have inspired. 
Both parties are on high alert for other defectors.
If Jeffords bolted over slights like not being invited to a Rose Garden ceremony for the Vermont educator named Teacher of the Year, thoughtfulness was the rule by week's end.
Republican leader Trent Lott, reeling from the loss of his majority leader post, was on the phone daily to chart the biorhythms of Rhode Island moderate Republican Lincoln Chafee, and probably would have delivered breakfast to his office had he asked.
Chafee's long-standing request for a meeting with Bush was answered with a phone message from congressional liaison Nick Calio: "Do you have any problem with sooner rather than later?"
Worried that Georgia Democrat Zell Miller might go Republican, Democratic whip Harry Reid personally walked Miller to one of the Democratic caucus meetings that Miller has been ducking of late, making sure Miller knows he has been missed.
And an Armed Services Committee hearing last week looked more like a group-therapy session, with Kansas Republican Pat Roberts hugging his Maine colleague Susan Collins and telling her he loved her, only to be hip-checked by Democrat Joe Lieberman, who wanted to give her a hug himself. 
One Republican who has been in quiet talks with the Democrats about the possibility of becoming an independent, sources tell TIME, is Bush's onetime presidential rival John McCain.
A Democratic source says the Arizona Senator initiated surreptitious contact about six weeks ago; a Republican one says Kennedy and North Carolina Democrat John Edwards raised the idea in a meeting they arranged with McCain in Kennedy's hideaway office.
More talks ensued--including sessions with Daschle and Reid--but McCain, if he ever seriously entertained the idea of switching, may find it more to his advantage to stay put.
Though the White House has done its best to keep him out of the action, he is now perfectly positioned to be the dealmaker it needs in a Democratic-controlled Senate. 
While McCain seems poised to become a de facto Republican leader, the future of the titular one is uncertain.
It was Trent Lott's intelligence failure, some noted, that let Jeffords slip away.
No one was stepping forward to challenge Lott for the top job--not yet, at least--but there was much G.O.P. grousing about the need for more aggressive leadership.
Of the names being mentioned as possible replacements, most were Senators inclined to steer the caucus toward a harder line against the Democrats, not a more conciliatory one. 
It's no surprise that sources close to Lott blame the White House for losing the Senate.
"They should have been coddling Jeffords, not punishing him," one says.
"By any undergraduate political-science calculation, the G.O.P. needed Jim Jeffords more than Jim Jeffords needed the G.O.P." None of which suggests that things will be easy for Daschle, who understands better than almost anyone else that Senate leadership is an oxymoron.
His new job will be the second hardest in Washington.
"It's still the same 100 people.
You still have the close division of parties and philosophies, so I don't think anything becomes easier," he told TIME.
"The only thing that radically changes is who sets the agenda." 
If Daschle cannot dictate how the Senate will work, he and his committee chairmen will have the power to decide which bills reach the floor.
He can force the debate to happen on his terms, at least in his half of the Capitol. 
That reality was already sinking in during final negotiations over the tax bill, which emerged from the House-Senate conference late Friday night and passed in both chambers Saturday.
Business lobbyists had been relatively restrained in trying to wedge special breaks into Bush's big tax cut, in part because the White House was promising there would be more to come.
But with the realization that this could be their last big meal for a very long time, the grocery-store owners whose priority is eliminating the estate tax were elbowing the brokerage firms that wanted to preserve provisions that give greater incentives for retirement savings.
That was a prelude to what will happen later this year, when the Senate Democrats' spending priorities collide with the House Republicans' dreams of smaller government. 
The first new business to come up after the Memorial Day recess, Daschle vows, will be the patient's bill of rights--not the version Bush touted as a compromise, but the one Daschle wants, which gives patients vastly greater leeway to sue their HMOs.
After the Senate passed the McCain-Feingold campaign-finance-reform bill in April, Lott refused to send it to the House.
Daschle told TIME, "I'll hand-deliver it if I have to." 
His new committee chairmen will take their shots as well.
Bush's missile-defense proposal is likely to look a lot different once it goes through a panel headed by chairman Carl Levin, a leading skeptic.
At Commerce, South Carolina's Fritz Hollings will put a shoulder to Bush's deregulatory push.
While Democrats as a first gesture of conciliation dropped their efforts to stall the nomination of Solicitor General Ted Olson, Bush's more controversial judicial nominations may die in Leahy's Judiciary Committee--or be euthanized before they get there.
On Saturday, for example, the New York Times reported that California conservative Chris Cox asked Bush not to nominate him to the federal bench because the confirmation fight would now be too bloody. 
Though all it took was one Senator to fracture the landscape in the capital, it will take everyone to put it back together.
On Wednesday, Daschle called Bush, and the two men spoke for the first time since March. "
He expressed his congratulations, and we talked about attempting to set a new tone and attempting to work together constructively," Daschle said.
"It was a very nice conversation."
And it may have been a start.
Thanks to a stern, quiet man named Jeffords, Bush may finally have the opportunity to create the kind of Washington he promised last fall.
The federal government will compensate people injured in the September 11 attacks as well as the families of the dead and missing, but only if they agree not to sue the airlines under the airline bailout bill that President Bush signed. 
"In the midst of the tragedy, there is some good news to report," said Mayor Rudolph Giuliani at a news conference Sunday. 
"The federal government will make every family who lost someone or had someone injured whole," said U.S. Sen. Charles Schumer, D-New York. 
"If you were a clerk who earned $30,000 a year and you had 20 years left, you'll get a lump sum payment of $30,000 a year for the next 20 years, plus the pain and suffering, plus the pension," Schumer said. 
"The airlines had come to us and said, 'If everybody sues us, we'll go bankrupt.'
The federal government stepped in to say, 'OK, we don't want the airlines to go bankrupt, but we want the people who need help to get help.'
That's what happened here." 
Giuliani added: "Every family member who has either lost someone or is in fear of losing someone should feel at least economic security. ...
We can't replace the loved one, and we can't deal with all of the emotional damage that they are going to have.
What this bill says to all of them is, the benefits are there.
That's the baseline.
There will be a lot of benefits.
Everyone will be protected.
" 
Relatives of victims may still choose to sue the airlines, but those who do will not be eligible for the federal deal. 
"That's their choice, but we doubt very many will, given the generosity of this," Schumer said. 
The compensation provision was inserted into the airline bailout bill by Schumer and Sens.
Tom Daschle, D-South Dakota, and Patrick Leahy, D-Vermont.
The Senate passed the bill Friday. 
Families of victims can file claims with the federal government to recover wages that would have gone to the missing and the dead and to receive compensation for the victims' pain and suffering, Schumer said. 
The claims are to include economic factors such as lost wages and noneconomic factors such as pain and suffering. 
A special master appointed by the Justice Department will review the claims and determine how much money each family will receive. 
The legislation requires the claims be paid within five months of the date the application is filed.
But families participating in the program must waive their right to sue in federal court. 
Payments would be offset by other benefits such as life insurance or pension plans.
Rep. Nancy Pelosi, D.-California, took House Republican leaders to task Saturday for their reluctance to push through an airline security bill passed unanimously in the Senate. 
"We need to move forward," Pelosi, elected this week as the House minority whip, said in the Democrats' weekly radio address. "
It is unacceptable to hold America's safety in the sky hostage to the political agenda of a handful in the House of Representatives." 
Republican leaders in the GOP-controlled House have balked over provisions in the bill to make the nation's 28,000 airport screeners and baggage handlers federal employees, saying the provision would only create more bureaucracy. 
Other provisions in the bill are based on recommendations from President Bush, and call for federal marshals on airplanes, increased cockpit security and hijack training for pilots. 
The legislation passed in the Senate on October 11. 
House GOP leaders have said they would insist on a bill that makes the federal government responsible for security but allows privately contracted employees to do the actual screening. 
Yet Pelosi said action is needed quickly.
She noted that the country's economy was struggling before the September 11 terror attacks and has "worsened" since then.
Stronger airline security, she said, "is critical to getting us back to business as usual.
" 
"In Congress, we must take immediate steps to ensure that all of our airlines and airports are safe," she said.
"We must not let airline security fall by the political wayside." 
Pelosi also urged Congress to provide aid for the more than 140,000 airline workers who lost their jobs in the wake of the industry's downturn after the terror attacks. 
"Democrats and Republicans must work together in this challenging time," she said.
"We will comfort those who lost their jobs, and ensure the safety of the American people."
French President Jacques Chirac met with President Bush Tuesday and promised his country would support the United States in the fight against terrorism. 
"I want to tell President Bush, who is my friend, that we bring you the total solidarity of France and the French people.
It is a solidarity of the heart," Chirac said in a brief news conference before the new leaders began their talks. 
"We are completely determined to fight by your side this new type of evil, of absolute evil, which is terrorism.
France is prepared and available to discuss all means to fight and eradicate this evil." 
Bush praised the French president as a "man of vision" and said he was glad for France's help in this "new kind of war." 
"This war will require determination and patience," Bush said.
"People who love freedom, such as Jacques Chirac and the people of France, will join us.
I am confident of that." 
The French president balked at Bush's description of the situation, however. 
"I don't know if we should use the word 'war,'" Chirac said.
"Now we are faced with a conflict of a completely new nature, a conflict that is attempting to destroy human rights, freedom, the dignity of man, and I believe that everything must be done to safeguard these values of civilization." 
He said France will do everything necessary to help the United States eradicate terrorism. 
"I would also like to add that practically all of the leaders of the world are following this line," Chirac said. 
Bush said the "new war" is not about taking territory, but a fight for liberty and freedom. 
"There are no beaches to storm, there are no islands to conquer, there are no battle lines to be drawn," Bush said. 
"It's a war that's going to take an international effort.
It's going to take all of us to gather the necessary intelligence, the necessary information, to be able to find the location of terrorists, to work with governments to smoke them out of their safe houses to get them moving, and then have the courage to bring them to justice." 
Chirac's visit was scheduled well in advance of the terrorist attacks last Tuesday.
The Australian Government has boosted its military commitment to the U.S.-led attacks on Afghanistan and warned the public its troops would be involved in a long and dangerous campaign. 
Prime Minister John Howard on Wednesday committed more than 1,500 military personnel -- including elite Special Air Service (SAS) troops -- four fighter aircraft, three frigates and two refuelling aircraft to the campaign against terror. 
Australia was one of the first countries to offer military support to the U.S. following the Sept. 11 attacks. 
The first Australian troops are expected to begin heading towards Afghanistan within the next few days. 
"Our forces will be overseas fighting in our name within a very short period of time," Howard said. 
"It will not be an easy operation," he said, adding that the "possibility of deaths, the possibility of casualties is quite high." 
Howard said U.S. President George W. Bush telephoned him on Tuesday night to ask Australia to "activate" his pledge to contribute to the military operations, wire service Reuters reports. 
The Australian commitment detailed Wednesday is significantly larger than originally planned. 
It adds four FA-18A long-distance strike aircraft, an amphibious command ship and two additional frigates to earlier commitments of SAS troops, a frigate, two Orion surveillance planes and two Boeing refuelling aircraft. 
Australia offered the support under the 50-year-old ANZUS security pact between the United States, Australia and New Zealand. 
The Prime Minister said the military forces would be under the command of Australia's Chief of Defense Admiral Chris Barrie but the U.S. military was calling the overall shots. 
"The total number of deployed personnel will be 1,550," Howard said. 
"This marks of course a significant further stage in the involvement of Australia, Australian military personnel and the Australian people in this war against terrorism," Howard said. 
The increased military commitment was supported by Australia's Labor party opposition leader Kim Beazley. 
"This is an appropriate commitment and a significant one," Beazley said. 
Australians go to the polls on November 10 in an election in which both Howard and Beazley are promoting their defense and security credentials. 
It will be the first major national election to be held since the New York and Washington attacks.
The mooning of George W. Bush by global-warming protesters in Goteborg, Sweden, last week was only the latest and most vulgar example of the criticism that has been heaped on the President since March, when he declared that the Kyoto agreement on climate change was dead.
The Administration, otherwise disciplined and well scripted in its first few months, has been left dazed and confused by the outcry at home and especially abroad.
It tried to recover its footing by touting a myriad of other worthy environmental initiatives.
But the problem hasn't gone away.
The President needs to come up with his own "Son of Kyoto." 
Bush is right in saying Kyoto has flaws.
Chief among them: under the accord, the developing countries (including China and India), which will soon account for the majority of emissions, have no obligation to control emissions growth.
Even Senate Democrats acknowledged that with a resolution that passed 95 to 0 in 1997 and declared the Senate unlikely to ratify any agreement that did not include meaningful participation by developing nations.
European leaders are probably breathing easier because Bush, by stepping forward, relieved them of the need to take concrete actions at home, where resistance to higher gasoline prices has been intense. 
But Kyoto, whatever its drawbacks, did contain one breakthrough: an architecture that would have allowed countries to reduce emissions through a credit-trading system.
The concept was pioneered by the President's father in his Clean Air Act, which cut acid rain in half by allowing U.S. utilities to trade sulfur dioxide credits.
Today the system would permit the industrialized countries to trade carbon-emission credits (basically licenses to emit specific amounts of greenhouse gases) among one another and participating developing countries.
Because climate change is a global problem, its solution is ideally suited to an international-trading regime.
Such trading is the key to solving the political puzzle on climate change as well.
It is widely predicted that the developing countries, whose industrial processes tend to be less efficient today, will be able to reduce carbon emissions at far lower cost than will the industrialized nations.
Countries would choose to make reductions in the hope of making money--in effect financing the upgrade of their industrial plant by selling emissions credits to nations in the West for which the cost of achieving reductions by retrofitting already modern infrastucture would be quite high.
That kind of trading would draw developing countries into the fight against global warming.
The financial rewards for joining the battle would be substantial.
In such a functioning market, carbon-reducing actions would be undertaken by those who could achieve them at the least economic cost, virtually guaranteeing the maximum amount of environmental benefit for every dollar invested. 
From that perspective, Kyoto was a pretty good deal for President Bush.
It was an extraordinarily difficult task for the Clinton Administration to get other nations to agree to a system that both allowed trading to reduce costs and gave credit for establishing carbon "sinks" by protecting growing forested areas or planting trees on degraded farmland.
Clinton and Gore negotiating the flexible, market-oriented Kyoto accord was a bit like Nixon going to China.
A conservative like Bush could never have achieved such flexibility without vituperative criticism from activists and Democrats. 
Clearly, the President now needs to move toward a Son of Kyoto that re-engages the international community.
The plan should include three key elements.
It must allow emissions trading, in order to reduce costs and induce all nations to participate.
It must ask developing countries to adopt a ceiling against which their reductions can be measured.
(For the trading currency to have value, it must be scarce.)
And finally, its mechanisms must encourage actions that reduce emissions for the long term, not just an initial period. 
Climate change can't be solved overnight.
It is the long-term effect that matters.
So Bush should propose a graduated set of emissions goals that stretch further into the future and cumulatively address the problem.
That would allow time for new technology to deliver efficiency gains, for developing countries to incorporate cleaner growth into their plans and for political leaders to see that if markets are allowed to function, people and businesses will respond to incentives in ways the politicians can't quite imagine today. 
The author, a venture capitalist at the Carlyle Group, teaches environmental policy at Stanford Business School.
He was a senior aide to President George Bush and helped frame the 1990 Clean Air Act
Russia is threatening to pull all its athletes out from the 2002 Winter Olympics at Salt Lake City unless explanations are given for some judging decisions.
They say the expulsion of Russia's hotly-tipped women's cross-country relay team from the competition, after one of its members was deemed to have failed a doping test, was unfair.
And they are angry at a previous week's decision to award the Canadian figure skating pair Jamie Sale and David Pelletier the gold, along with the Russian pair Yelena Berezhnaya and Anton Sikharulidze.
's
Jill Dougherty explains how the Russians have responded to the treatment of their athletes and how politics has entered the sporting arena.
: The Russians are talking about conspiracy theories behind some of the decisions.
What are the theories?
: Russians believe the decisions have become highly politicised.
A number of people feel that the U.S. wants to rule the world, including politics and sports -- every aspect.
They feel there are a number of coincidences, with the decisions going against the Russians.
There are too many coincidences, they say.
They believe the adverse decisions have been made on purpose.
When you try and pin down the issue precisely, nobody wants to say it is the U.S. government.
More, they say that the old Cold War feelings are emerging.
In the old days they felt they were not being dealt with fairly and that there was animosity towards to the east --
that is coming back, they say.
: Politics is no stranger to sport, just think back at the national boycotts at the Moscow and Los Angeles Olympics.
How important is it that Putin has entered the fray?
: And not just Putin, but the Russian parliament as well.
Putin is the person who can tell the team to stay or walk out.
It is important what he says.
It is also important to him politically because it has become a big domestic issue.
It is one of the main items on the Russian television and in newspaper editorials.
People are talking about it in the gyms.
Everybody is talking about it.
People really feel they have been insulted and not treated fairly.
Putin, as a politician, has to realise that people are very angry about it.
Also, there has been a vote in the Russian parliament.
Only three votes were against the measure which called for the boycotting of the closing ceremony at the games, as opposed to walking out of the competition.
They also passed a non-binding resolution which calls for the IOC to apologise to the Russian team and explain how the decisions were arrived at.
But some people are saying the athletes have trained for four years and deserve to compete as it might be their only chance to win a gold.
: How serious is the threat of Russia walking out?
: I do not think that will happen.
I doubt if Putin will support the call made by the president of the Russian committee for the IOC.
But they may choose not to turn up for the closing ceremony.
: How can you argue with a doping test?
: Well, that is what they are doing here.
The cross-country skier was kicked out after testing positive for an elevated level of haemoglobin, in violation of doping rules.
But they are linking it with a woman's menstrual cycle.
They have denied any type of drugs-taking.
What they really did not like about the decision to expel Larissa Lazutina was that it happened so late in the day that a replacement could not be found.
: How much do we have to see the threat in the context of the Sale and Pelletier incident?
: They felt the decision to upgrade the Canadian pair's silver to gold was incorrect.
They argue the Russian pair won fairly.
The Russian case is all part of a series of decisions.
: How serious are the Russians about a re-run of the cross-country race?
: They are completely serious.
They figure the women would have won it.
They also want an investigation into all the controversial decisions to see if they were fair.
: Could we see a return of frosty relations between the U.S. and Russia?
: Russians do not necessarily blame the American people, just that the judges are not fair.
They feel that during the Cold War they were treated like this, and they are again.
But in the long-run I doubt if the Russian government would use this in their economic and political relations.
Russia will not want to over react.
They will express their unhappiness, but they will not turn away international investment.
A Pentagon investigation into the October bombing of the USS Cole has concluded that the ship's captain and crew should not be punished. 
Pentagon officials decided there was plenty of blame to go around for the security lapses that left the Cole vulnerable to attack in Yemen.
The explosion, which originated from a small ship that pulled up beside the destroyer in the port of Aden, left 17 sailors dead and wounded 39 others. 
Announcing the Pentagon's conclusion was William Cohen's final act as defense secretary. 
"We must constantly search for and find the so-called seams in our force protection plans before our enemies do," he said.
"And in the case of Cole, we did not do so." 
Cohen accepted some of the blame himself, as did the Navy's top admiral. 
"There is a collective responsibility here, and that we all in the chain of command share responsibility for what happened on board USS Cole," said Adm. Vern Clark. 
The Navy investigation details 12 basic security measures that Cmdr.
Kirk Lippold, skipper of the Cole, failed to implement the day the ship was nearly sunk by suicide bombers in a small boat. 
An investigating officer wrote that those lapses, such as the failure to monitor unauthorized boats, "allowed the terrorist craft to come along side the ship unchallenged." 
But Clark overruled that conclusion. 
"My conviction is that no one on that ship should be blamed for this tragedy, because no one on the ship could have stopped this attack with the circumstances that they faced," he said. 
Clark said the loss of 17 sailors was "not the product of carelessness or folly, but a deliberate attack by a determined adversary," and he vowed that the Navy would do a better job in the future of equipping its commanders to deal with the threat of terrorism. 
Video just released by the Navy shows the crew just a few days after the attack, talking to Navy camera crews. 
"We just heard a big boom and we all bounced up and down a couple of times," said one sailor. 
"I was in the operations offices, two compartments from the blast," another said.
"I got about every inch of the blast you could think of without actually getting hurt." 
At the time of the interviews, the exhausted crew was still battling to stop leaks in withering heat, and sleeping on the Cole's deck because of the lack of power and air- conditioning. 
Note: Pages will open in a new browser window External sites are not endorsed by CNN Interactive.
Conservatives hate to meddle in the markets.
So it would be hard to find a more unlikely advocate for federal price controls than California Congressman Duncan Hunter, whose voting record nearly every year gets a 100% rating from the American Conservative Union.
But when the owner of a small metal shop in El Cajon showed Hunter his December electric bill--$115,000 for the month, four times what the man had been paying before the state's electricity crisis began--Hunter changed his mind.
"I came to the conclusion that this wasn't free enterprise," the San Diego County Republican says.
On the day George W. Bush was inaugurated, Hunter introduced a bill authorizing the new Administration to impose caps on "unjust and unreasonable prices in the electric-energy market." 
The Administration wasn't interested.
For the past six months, Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney have rarely missed a chance to say what a huge mistake government controls of California energy costs would be.
But the argument has been slapping up against an obvious political problem: Bush's free-market principles mirror the financial interests of his backers in the energy industry--top executives who are cashing in stock options for tens and hundreds of millions of dollars while their corporate profits are tripling.
"The consequence of the inaction has been a massive transfer of wealth from the ordinary citizens of California to rich energy barons in Houston, Charlotte and Atlanta," California's Democratic Governor, Gray Davis, told TIME.
The state's wholesale energy bill grew from $7 billion in 1999 to $27 billion last year, and could reach $55 billion this year. 
With 54 electoral votes, California isn't used to getting the cold shoulder from Washington.
But if the plight of the state's ratepayers hasn't forced Bush to rethink the wisdom of price caps, the plight of its Republicans may have.
Control of the House in next year's midterm elections could depend on half a dozen endangered G.O.P. seats in California.
That's why House majority whip Tom DeLay told Bush two weeks ago that he shouldn't count on Republicans to beat back price caps.
There may be collateral damage at the other end of the Capitol as well.
Sources say Senate minority leader Trent Lott has warned Bush aides that California's problems could infect 10 Western states, endangering Colorado's Wayne Allard, Idaho's Larry Craig and Oregon's Gordon Smith.
And while Bush may be writing off California's votes, plenty of Democrats covet them, including putative presidential contender Joe Lieberman, whose first act as a new committee chairman last week was to launch hearings into the state's energy crisis. 
So Bush is in a bind--caught between his principles and moneymen on one side and the prospect of summertime blackouts, spiraling prices and mutinous legislators on the other.
He needs a way out, and may have found one.
This week a little-known agency called the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission meets in a special session, its first with two new Bush appointees in place.
For the past year, FERC has ignored pleas for sweeping electricity price controls in California and other Western states.
Last fall, at a congressional subcommittee hearing in San Diego, chairman Curtis Hebert suggested that consumers should learn to live with higher electricity prices.
"If the truth kills Granny," he declared, "let her die.
" When things got really bad last spring, FERC limited prices only during the worst power emergencies.
But this week FERC is expected to approve full-time price controls. 
Why is FERC relenting?
The argument against price caps is that they do infinitely more harm than good, as Jimmy Carter and Richard Nixon discovered when they allowed government bureaucrats to clog the gears of a free market.
Price caps, says Energy Secretary Spence Abraham, are merely a formula for "an increase in the scope, duration and frequency of blackouts." 
But Davis, along with virtually the entire California congressional delegation, Democratic and Republican, says the market now is anything but free.
It is being manipulated, in their view, by energy companies that have wrung billions out of California consumers by squeezing supply to create artificial shortages.
Why else, they say, would California power suppliers like Enron Corp.--
a Houston-based trading giant headed by one of Bush's top donors and informal energy advisers--be seeing their revenues jump 281% in the first quarter?
Even a respected free-marketeer like Alfred Kahn, the father of airline deregulation, has had enough.
"The notion that caps automatically interfere with the increase of supply in the electric industry is absurd," he says. 
Word of FERC's expected action comes as Californians are getting a break from towering prices.
Last Wednesday, Davis says, the state paid only $29 million for its power--a sharp drop from the $100 million a day it spent in mid-May.
While FERC credits its own emergency measures for the lower costs, Davis political adviser Garry South says it is more likely the result of unseasonably cool weather and power companies "trying to lay low until the posse passes by." 
For Bush, the beauty of having the nominally independent FERC send an ems team to Granny's house is that it allows him to keep his distance and take credit at the same time--to escape the bind without seeming to try.
At a frosty meeting with California lawmakers last week, Cheney repeated his opposition to price controls even as he suggested help from FERC could be on the way.
The White House believes in the free market, but it will crow this week that FERC acted because Bush had called on it to be vigilant. "
He has not been looking for the short-term political fix but addressing long-term problems," says Gerry Parsky, who chaired Bush's California campaign.
"But what he has done is tell FERC to do its job." 
Having it both ways requires some semantic gymnastics.
FERC draws a distinction between "price caps," which impose a maximum allowable price, and the more flexible "price mitigation," which sets prices based on a formula that factors in producers' costs. 
Fair enough.
But the White House is taking pains to get its story straight.
At a meeting in economic adviser Larry Lindsey's office, aides were told to use the poll-approved "price caps" in place of the harsher "price controls.
" Republicans on Capitol Hill are thumbing through their thesauruses for other ways to describe the abrupt change of course.
To some, the idea of telling their allies in the energy industry to give back their "unearned enrichment" seems more palatable than slapping them for "price gouging."
And for those who find "caps" too strong to take, there's always "market mitigation." 
But how they spell relief won't matter if FERC's action doesn't work.
"It's better than nothing but not nearly as attractive as it sounds," says Davis, who will tell Lieberman's committee the same thing this week.
"The way around it is quite obvious.
Generators simply sell the product to a middle person--which they do anyway--and that marketer has no obligations under the order."
Also, the order will not get back the $7 billion California estimates it has been overcharged by electricity suppliers since last May. 
Even if FERC's order proves effective, Republicans will have salvage work to do.
Polls show Californians disapprove of how Bush has handled their biggest problem; some even think he's out to get them.
Bush and Davis talked past each other during a meeting in Los Angeles last month, when Bush was on his first presidential trip to the state.
But real negotiations were under way elsewhere.
Sources tell TIME that political adviser Karl Rove met privately with outgoing Republican mayor Richard Riordan to press him to enter next year's race for Governor against Davis.
Rove and top Republicans have kept the pressure on, letting Riordan know that Bush moneymen are waiting with checks if he gets in, and sharing G.O.P. polls with him that show Davis may have been fatally wounded by his handling of the crisis.
While the Governor claims he inherited the state's deregulation mess, even Democrats accuse him of ignoring it until it was too late.
A strong challenge by Riordan could not only unseat the Democratic Governor but also create coattails big enough to keep Republican House members in office. 
Californians will be getting a preview of that war this week as a group called the American Taxpayers Alliance begins airing TV ads featuring fuzzy closeups of a robotic-looking Davis, claiming he is to blame for the state's energy problems.
Although the A.T.A. styles itself an "issue advocacy group," funding for the ads comes from, among hundreds of other corporations, a major power generator called Reliant Energy, one of the companies California officials accuse of price gouging.
(James Baker, who headed the Bush recount effort in Florida, is a director, and chairman Steve Letbetter was a top Bush fund raiser.)
Republican sources tell TIME that Scott Reed, the longtime G.O.P. activist who heads A.T.A., hopes to raise $25 million to keep the ads running.
Bush outside adviser Ed Gillespie, an Enron lobbyist, is raising a separate $500,000 war chest for ads attacking price caps. 
Not that Davis is without resources.
He is paying former Al Gore strategists Mark Fabiani and Chris Lehane $30,000 a month of taxpayer money to handle the p.r.
crisis inside the energy crisis.
That's despite the fact that Fabiani and Lehane--known as "masters of disaster" for their work at the White House during the Clinton scandals--are consultants to Southern California Edison, a utility at the eye of the storm. 
California is only part of the G.O.P.'s energy problem.
Bush's plan to boost production nationally is in trouble.
In mid-April, internal House polls showed the Republicans 3 points behind the Democrats on the question of which party could be trusted more on energy issues.
Two weeks ago, they'd fallen to 15 points behind.
Republicans fear that will only get worse as Lieberman and two other committee chairmen convene hearings on Bush's energy policies--and his friends in the industry.
Both state and federal authorities are probing allegations of market manipulation by a variety of power generators and pipeline operators. 
Even if federal regulators take some of the sting out of California's energy prices, tight supplies and high temperatures will ensure that sporadic blackouts continue.
It's hard to tell who will have the hotter summer--Californians, their Governor, energy executives or George W. Bush.
President Bush issued a progress report on his war against terrorism during his weekly radio address Saturday, saying that U.S. and British strikes in Afghanistan had "achieved the goals of the first phase of the campaign." 
Bush also sought to reassure the nation that the government is taking action to protect against terrorist strikes on U.S. soil.
And he renewed his call for Americans to contribute to a fund set up to aid Afghan children "suffering from the oppression and misrule of their own government." 
"This is something the children of America can do for the children of Afghanistan, even as we oppose the brutal Taliban regime," the president said.
"We will oppose their evil with firm justice, and we will answer their hatred with compassion for the Afghan people." 
Bush said the first week of U.S. and British airstrikes had taken "the war to the enemy" and caused widespread disruption to the terrorist network inside Afghanistan and to its ruling Taliban regime. 
"We have crippled the Taliban's air defenses," he said.
"American forces dominate the skies over Afghanistan, and we will use that dominance to make sure terrorists can no longer freely use Afghanistan as a base of operations." 
The president also sought to allay the public's fears about further terrorist attacks in the United States. 
He pledged the "full support of our entire government" to former Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Ridge as he heads up the new Office of Homeland Security. 
"I understand that many Americans are feeling uneasy," he said.
"But all Americans should be assured: We are taking strong precautions, we are vigilant, we are determined, the country is alert, and the great power of the American nation will be felt." 
The president divided his time Saturday morning between keeping apprised of events in Afghanistan and preparing for his upcoming trip to China. 
He took part in a videoconference with his national security team.
With him were CIA Director George Tenet, National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice and White House Chief of Staff Andrew Card. 
Bush then met with Rice in preparation for his visit to China next week, where he is to attend the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit. 
Finally, the president went for a walk.
Tom Ridge has the most important job in America: to make sure that the horror of Sept. 11 never happens again.
Now, in addition to the former Pennsylvania Governor, George W. Bush wants retired General Wayne Downing, a dashing commando, to join his new team as a top counterterrorism aide.
But in the three weeks since Bush tapped Ridge to head his new Office of Homeland Security, the unified front against terrorism has started to develop some cracks. 
Last Tuesday the White House circulated an Executive Order outlining Ridge's powers.
Senior Administration sources tell TIME the draft order will not give Ridge direct control over the counterterrorism budgets in other agencies, which could be key to shaping the antiterror bureaucracy.
Moreover, Pentagon sources say Downing, word of whose likely appointment was leaked by Bush aides more than a week ago, has had second thoughts about taking the job because the powers he expected to be granted have been trimmed.
The new office, says a senior Administration aide, "is being set up for failure.
" 
If the air strikes against the World Trade Center and the Pentagon taught us anything, it is that terrorism knows no boundaries.
The hijackers were indoctrinated and trained in the Middle East and Southwest Asia, plotted their operation in Europe and Asia, and carried it out in the U.S. Bill Clinton recognized this "transnational" fact of life in 1998, when he named Richard Clarke, a National Security Council aide, as his counterterrorism czar to supervise the battle both at home and abroad.
Clarke was hamstrung because he had no control over other agencies' budgets.
But he made a strong case for having one person oversee the attack on terrorism and knock heads in the bureaucracy. 
It looks as if Ridge won't have much more authority than Clarke did.
Ridge, like Clarke, won't be able to force agencies to spend more on homeland defense.
The draft Executive Order circulated last week says the agencies will "retain" that control.
Ridge will be able only to coordinate activities and coax other agencies into spending money on his cause.
And instead of one person overseeing the fight against terrorism at home and abroad, there will now be two.
National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice was willing to let Ridge run the war in the U.S. against terrorists.
But she insisted that control of the overseas battle remain at the National Security Council, with Downing as its head. 
A can-do general, Downing led U.S. special forces in the 1989 invasion of Panama, then Delta Force commandos who hunted for Iraqi Scud missiles during the 1991 Persian Gulf War.
But he became disenchanted with the appointment last week after discovering he probably would not get the $10 million budget or the staff of 30
he thought he had been promised.
Senior White House aides believe they can talk him into taking the job. 
The State Department sent a stinging memo to the White House last week on the plan to keep domestic and foreign counterterrorism efforts divided and complained that it was "startling" that Secretary of State Colin Powell doesn't get a seat on Ridge's Homeland Security council. "
Doing it piecemeal like this sets us back 10 years," says a State Department official. 
Ridge says he'll have "all the resources I need."
White House aides insist he'll be able to shape budgets behind the scenes because he has Bush's ear. "
He knows the President well," says one.
"He has the most important new portfolio in town.
The notion that he wouldn't have power strikes me as quizzical." 
In Washington the perception of power certainly is as important as what is written in an Executive Order.
How Ridge manipulates that image with other departments will determine his heft. "
He's got to say, 'This is what the President wants,' with a cold steely eye, which Tom Ridge is good at," says Senator Pat Roberts, a G.O.P. member of the Intelligence Committee.
But the bureaucracy has seen coordinators come and go, and it's very deft at staring them down.
The U.S.-led military campaign in Afghanistan has created friction between members of the al Qaeda terrorist network and leaders of the ruling Taliban, U.S. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said Sunday. 
"It appears that there is at least some reason to believe that there is a difference of view, competition, between [Taliban leader Mullah Mohammed] Omar and his immediate lieutenants and Osama bin Laden and his lieutenants," Rumsfeld said on CBS' "Face the Nation." 
Also Sunday, top U.S. officials said they were taking seriously claims by bin Laden, made in a Pakistani newspaper interview, that he has weapons of mass destruction, though they expressed doubt that he has nuclear capability. 
Rumsfeld said it is too soon to know how serious the differences may be between al Qaeda and the Taliban.
But he told CBS there appear to be "differences as to who should be in command of what, differences as to where forces should be reinforced or not reinforced, differences as to where supplies should go." 
As to any access by al Qaeda to weapons of mass destruction, Rumsfeld said that "there is no question" that bin Laden wants such capability but is unlikely to have it. 
"On the other hand, with the determination they have, they may very well," he said.
He added that "there is no doubt in my mind" al Qaeda would use weapons of mass destruction if they had them. 
"We have no credible evidence that he has them at this point in time, but we're not going to take any chances," she said. 
With the Northern Alliance making military advances on the ground in recent days, U.S. officials, including President Bush, have said they do not want opposition forces to move into the capital, Kabul, until an agreement is in place establishing a framework for a broad-based post-Taliban government that represents all of the country's rival ethnic groups. 
U.S. officials indicated Sunday that one reason for this strategy is that they are trying to enlist Pashtun tribal forces in southern Afghanistan.
The Northern Alliance is dominated by people from the Tajik and Uzbek ethnic groups rather than the Pashtuns, who constitute the largest ethnic group in the country. 
"Our goal is to get the tribes in the south to oppose the Taliban," Rumsfeld told CBS.
"They have been relatively quiet thus far.
We need them to oppose the Taliban.
Therefore, we need them to recognize that they're going to have a voice in the post-Taliban government." 
Speaking on NBC's "Meet the Press," Secretary of State Colin Powell said Pashtun leaders "are going to start taking a hard look ...
[at] what the Taliban regime leadership is costing their country" with Northern Alliance battlefield successes. 
"As we start to encourage those southern tribes, I think they might start deciding that there's a better life ahead by separating themselves from the Taliban," Powell said. 
Abdullah Abdullah, the Northern Alliance's foreign minister, supported the U.S. position on Kabul in an interview on "Late Edition.
" 
"Capturing Kabul is not just a military situation.
There is a political importance and significance to it as well," he said.
"It would be an ideal situation for us to have a broad agreement with different Afghan groups before entering Kabul.
We do agree in that regard."
As America wages its war on terrorism, history will judge the nation by how it defends equality at home and human rights abroad, former Vice President Al Gore said Saturday. 
"Political, religious and economic freedom represent the way we as human beings are intended to live our lives together," Gore told a New Hampshire Democratic Party fund-raiser.
"We will never turn our backs on those values." 
Gore, paying a visit to the state that hosts the nation's first presidential primary, did not say if he would run again in 2004, despite the prodding of 500 guests, some of whom chanted "Gore in four." 
"I'm not gonna respond to that, but I appreciate the encouragement," said Gore, who lost to President Bush in last year's election.
"I have not decided what I am going to do in the future." 
The terrorist attacks underscore the need for America to promote its values of freedom and peace throughout the world, he said. 
"It's been a long time since we've faced a situation where we've been under attack from a group that just wants to kill Americans," he said.
"It really challenges our traditional way of thinking about these things. 
Gore said the message of Afghanistan's ruling Taliban party is one of terror and injustice and discrimination, a society in which women must hide their faces and are not allowed to go to the doctor. 
"It's not really about religion," Gore said.
"My religious tradition says that by their fruits, you shall know them.
Well, we've seen their fruits, a devastated land where people are suffering from violence and discrimination of all kinds." 
Gore praised the dedication of firefighters and police officers who continue to risk their lives despite losing hundreds of colleagues in the September 11 attacks in New York and Washington. 
"They were the ones going up the stairs when the rest of the people were trying to escape," Gore said.
"What tremendous courage." 
Gore also said it is important for Americans to stand behind Bush during this time of crisis, and for Democrats to continue the debate at home over the economy and social reform. 
Saturday's $75-a-plate Jefferson-Jackson Dinner was expected to raise more than $20,000 for the party, officials said. 
Gore kept a low-profile in the days leading up to the event as he toured the state and met with party members. 
He said that if he runs for president again, there's at least one thing he'll change: "If I had it to do over again I would have kissed Tipper longer at the convention." 
Copyright 2001
The Associated Press .
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
Tony Blair was doing his loyal best to stick up for a new American President.
George W. Bush sat with the British Prime Minister at his country house last Thursday afternoon, chewing over Bush's determination to build a U.S. missile shield.
The President was pressing to take the Atlantic alliance and the world in a brave new direction, moving from an era of treaties and verification to one of...well, Blair didn't know what.
He wanted a few details to play against the angst felt by his European confreres.
"What do you want me to support?"
he asked.
"What are you proposing?"
Speaking to the press just after the meeting, Bush hunched his shoulders and zeroed in on his dilemma.
"It's hard," he acknowledged, "for any country to commit to vague notions." 
Exactly.
Nevertheless, the Bush Administration was loudly warning last week that national missile defense is virtually a fait accompli.
It's coming, whatever it is. 
But what's the rush?
Of all the priorities the President could be spending his political capital and the country's resources on, exactly why has he chosen to make missile defense so urgent?
There's no public clamor for it; no one knows if it works; most of America's friends and rivals hate it; and the incoming rogue ICBMs it is supposed to obliterate don't yet exist.
But Bush's insistence on deploying a Son of Star Wars a.s.a.p. formed the edgy subtext of his meetings with European leaders in Genoa and the top talking point for his second sitdown with Russian President Vladimir Putin. 
Bush is in love with the idea.
Installing a missile shield--making it the keystone of a visionary strategic architecture--is his greatest faith-based initiative.
The Administration intends to "explain" its plan over and over until it comes true.
That worked with tax cuts. 
So Bush was stung last week when Senate majority leader Tom Daschle undercut his campaign by suggesting that the President's foreign policy imperatives are "isolating" and "minimizing" America.
When Bush heard about the remarks, he snapped, "Check that.
That can't be right."
After a very "chilly" call from National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice, Daschle apologized for his timing--but not for his point. 
Missile defense is a far tougher sell than tax cuts, with a mountain of technical, political and diplomatic obstacles.
The killer missile last week that destroyed a dummy warhead was only the second success in four tries.
Defense-shield boosters hailed it as a significant victory, even if it was more important politically than technologically.
And the Pentagon knows that, which is why advocates used the afterglow to roll out an array of planned "boost phase," "midcourse" and "terminal phase" experiments from land, sea, air and space bases. 
The basic theory is so appealing: to replace cold war reliance on mutual suicide with 21st century security beneath a defensive umbrella.
Though Russia and China possess by far the most nukes that could incinerate the U.S., the Administration says its shield isn't so much for protection from them but to defend against the possibility that a nasty regime in North Korea or Iraq or Iran will soon be able to loft a missile at America.
A nuke is more likely to come in a suitcase than on a warhead, but the hurry-up argument doesn't deal with that fact.
"We're already too late," says an aide. 
You have to believe that premise for the rest to follow.
It's very Reaganesque.
Where the former President saw a Russian lurking behind every bedpost, Bush sees rogue nations holding America hostage.
Where Reagan liked simple story lines, Bush likes executive summaries.
A missile shield is a succinct solution to a complex problem.
Like Reagan, Bush prides himself on cowboy toughness--on being a man who knows what he believes and charges fearlessly ahead. 
Like Reagan too, Bush was unschooled in foreign policy when he ran for President.
Along the way, he absorbed the passion of his briefers, Star Wars true believers from the Reagan days brought together by Rice to tutor him in the canons of their strategic religion.
Those voices evidently captured his imagination, and now in his Administration, led vigorously by Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, they urge him on. 
The radical decision Bush has recently made is to move full speed on a defense system that runs afoul of the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty, which limits testing and deployment of new defensive systems.
Critics say the rapid-fire tests that could bust the treaty are designed to do so; for some Bush advisers, getting rid of ABM is an end in itself. 
Standing in the way is Putin.
Russia, like China--with whom Putin last week signed a treaty of "friendship forever" that aligns them politically against missile defense--charges that the U.S. shield will wreck nuclear stability and spark a new arms race.
More practically, Russia is the other party to the ABM treaty.
The tests the Pentagon has in mind will violate its terms "within months, not years," says a freshly circulated State Department memo.
Officials talk of deployment as early as 2004.
That schedule turns the screws on Putin to modify the treaty to suit Washington right away--or the U.S. will simply pull out. 
Candidate Bush chastised Bill Clinton for turning Russian-American relations into a game of personal chemistry.
That was forgotten when Bush first met Putin last month and gushed that he had looked into the former KGB man's eyes "to get a sense of his soul."
Bush believes his charm and persuasiveness will move his pal Putin to let the U.S. do what it wants.
As an adviser puts it, the Administration is going to "work it and work it and work it and work it" until Putin gives way. 
But the Russian leader has been saying no, no, no.
He probably cares less about the sanctity of the ABM treaty than the harm its demise might do to Russia's standing in the world and his image at home.
Analysts in most capitals, including Moscow, think he's bargaining for everything he can get before he says O.K. He needs the veneer of equal dialogue, and the sweeteners could be costly--no NATO expansion; keeping quiet as Russia continues economic ties to Iraq and Iran. 
Meanwhile, Putin continues to mix his signals.
He has laid out a modest framework for "modernizing" ABM, and ladled on some soft soap before setting off for Genoa last week, calling Dubya "a little bit sentimental."
But Putin has also demonstrated why he won't be easy to roll.
Besides inking the treaty with China, he has repeatedly warned that Russia will cram more warheads atop its missiles if Bush abandons the ABM treaty. 
Bush's aides say they're confident Putin will eventually do a deal.
Their aim now is to hurry him up.
The rapid timetable is governed by political arithmetic: to lock in missile defense before Bush's first term ends.
In fact, the President can just bulldoze ahead.
Russia can cooperate and get something or sulk and get nothing.
European objections don't count if Russia concedes.
The Democrat-led Senate can't stop Bush from breaking the ABM treaty, though it can tighten the purse strings. 
Yet Daschle's warning might give Bush pause.
Among friends and foes alike, the perception is taking hold that Bush's America intends to go its own way.
"Nobody's putting ABM on a pedestal," says Jacques Beltran, a researcher at the French Institute for International Relations.
"But they're hostile to the U.S. pulling out of it unilaterally.
This is all about style."
To create a lasting new world order, transactions between the sole superpower and the rest of the globe need the appearance of give and take, not diktat.
Bin Laden's anger with the United States stems from the 1990 decision by Saudi Arabia to allow the U.S. to stage attacks on Iraqi forces in Kuwait and Iraq.
After the U.S. victory, the U.S. military presence became permanent. 
In a CNN interview with bin Laden in 1997, he said the ongoing U.S. military presence in Saudi Arabia is an "occupation of the land of the holy places." 
He left Saudi Arabia in 1991 after feuding with the Saudi monarchy, taking assets that had grown to an estimated $250 million with him, U.S. officials say. 
In 1996, bin Laden issued a "fatwah," a religious ruling urging Muslims to kill U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia and Somalia.
A second fatwah in 1998 called for attacks on American civilians. 
Bin Laden began forming his network in 1979, when he went to Afghanistan to fight the Soviets alongside Afghan resistance fighters known as the mujahedeen. 
He used his family's connections and wealth to raise money for the Afghan resistance and provide the mujahedeen with logistical and humanitarian aid, and participated in several battles in the Afghan war. 
As the war with the Soviets drew to a close, bin Laden formed al Qaeda, an organization of ex-mujahedeen and other supporters channeling fighters and funds to the Afghan resistance. 
Once the Soviets pulled out of Afghanistan, bin Laden returned to Saudi Arabia to work for the family construction firm, the bin Laden Group.
He became involved in Saudi groups opposed to the reigning Saudi monarchy, the Fahd family. 
In 1994, the Saudi government stripped him of his citizenship and froze any remaining assets he may have had in the country. 
Bin Laden is believed to be at the center of an international coalition of Islamic radicals.
Al Qaeda has forged alliances with like-minded fundamentalist groups such as Egypt's Al Jihad, Iran's Hezbollah, Sudan's National Islamic Front, and jihad groups in Yemen, Saudi Arabia, and Somalia, according to the U.S. government. 
Bin Laden's organization also has ties to the "Islamic Group," led at one time by Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the Egyptian cleric serving a life sentence since his 1995 conviction for a thwarted plot to blow up various New York landmarks.
Two of Sheik Rahman's sons joined forces with bin Laden in the late 1990s. 
The United States alleges that from 1992 on, bin Laden and other al Qaeda members targeted U.S. military forces in Saudi Arabia and Yemen and those stationed in the Horn of Africa, including Somalia. 
In October 1993, 18 U.S. servicemen involved in the U.S. humanitarian relief effort in Somalia were killed during an operation in Mogadishu.
One soldier's body was dragged through the streets. 
Bin Laden was indicted in 1996 on charges of training the people involved in the attack and in a 1997 interview with CNN, bin Laden said his followers, together with local Muslims, killed those troops. 
U.S. law enforcement also alleges that bin Laden has ties to failed attacks on two hotels in Yemen where U.S. troops stayed en route to Somalia. 
On August 7, 1998, eight years after the U.S. deployment in Saudi Arabia, a pair of truck bombs exploded outside the U.S. embassies in Nairobi, Kenya, and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. 
Bin Laden has denied responsibility, but prosecutors allege his culpability is evident on faxes sent by his London cell to at least three international media outlets.
They also point to incriminating statements by certain alleged embassy bombers who are admitted al Qaeda members. 
Nearly two weeks later, on August 20, 1998, President Clinton ordered cruise missile attacks against suspected terrorist training camps in Afghanistan and a pharmaceutical plant in Khartoum, Sudan. 
Bin Laden survived the strikes and was indicted by the United States on charges of masterminding the attacks in November 1998. 
Four of his alleged supporters were convicted of the bombings May 29, 2001, and sentenced to life in prison.
Several suspects are in custody awaiting trial. 
The man who pleaded guilty to a failed plot to bomb Los Angeles International Airport during the millennium celebrations leading up to New Year's Day 2000 claimed he was trained at an Afghanistan camp run by bin Laden. 
Ahmed Ressam said he learned how to handle handguns, machine guns and rocket-propelled grenade launchers and how to assemble bombs made from the explosives TNT and C4. 
Bin Laden is suspected to be living in Afghanistan as a guest of its ruling Taliban government. 
Taliban officials have condemned the September 11 attacks on the United States and said that he could not have been involved.
The regime also has said it does not know where bin Laden is, a claim the United States refutes.
There hasn't been much in Darrell Wayne Condit's sad life to distinguish him.
The Florida drifter's rap sheet is a pathetic recitation of offenses so mundane--drugs, robbery, auto theft, driving with a suspended license--they would barely have made the local news pages.
And yet there he was last week on the front page of the New York Post, stringy haired and glassy eyed under a headline demanding:
ASK HIM.
How did he come to figure in the sensational case of the nation's most famous missing person?
Was there any evidence that he had anything to do with the disappearance of Chandra Levy--other than the fact that he happened to be the brother of the Congressman with whom she had had an affair? 
Not a shred, sources close to the Levy family concede.
But the demand by unnamed Levy "family sources" that police find and question Darrell Condit, who was arrested Saturday on an unrelated charge (a DUI parole violation), served its purpose.
It gave reporters a new angle to cover in a case that has been cold almost from the beginning.
And that kept the pressure on police to continue looking for Chandra Levy--and on Congressman Gary Condit to provide whatever he may know about how and why she vanished. 
If there is one reason Chandra Levy's is the only name you recognize among the roughly half a million people reported missing this year across the country, it is the determination of her desperate family to put her in the news and keep her there.
By the standards police apply to most of their cases, Levy's disappearance--for all its sexual intrigue and despite her connection to a powerful politician--would have moved into the background by now.
After three months of saturation coverage, Washington police chief Charles Ramsey says, "we still don't have a hard lead," despite the hundreds of tips that are pouring into police headquarters each week.
Investigators last week were reduced to scouring wooded parkland they had already searched, re-interviewing other tenants of her apartment building and making public information they had had for months in the hope that someone else might see some significance in the websites (Baskin-Robbins, National Geographic) that Levy visited. 
But every time the case has been in any danger of languishing for lack of evidence, the Levy team has put it back in the spotlight by catering to the media's hunger for news in a newsless story.
The family's lawyer, Billy Martin, saw plenty of missing-persons cases fall through the cracks in his 15 years as a federal prosecutor.
From the start, he believed "p.r. was going to be key" to keeping that from happening to Chandra, says a source close to the Levys.
So the team hired the high-powered Washington public relations firm Porter Novelli and later added another p.r.
professional, Judy Smith, with whom Martin had worked when both were representing Monica Lewinsky's family.
Martin, a popular figure with Washington police from his days as an assistant U.S. Attorney, was careful not to put any distance between investigators and the Levys on the public relations front.
That's why the Levy team has not led criticism that police moved too slowly at the outset. 
The Levy team has set the tempo of the coverage, a rhythm as regular as Susan and Robert Levy's appearances before the waiting cameras at the end of their driveway.
After Condit denied the affair in two interviews with police, Levy's aunt and confidant, Linda Zamsky, provided details of their liaison to the Washington Post--details so embarrassing that they rang true. "
It accomplished what we wanted," says one of the Levys' allies.
That night Condit volunteered to do a third interview--the one in which he finally admitted the affair.
The Levys then ramped up their demands, asking that Condit take a lie-detector test; he did so privately (the FBI dismisses the results as useless) and invited police to search his apartment. 
The Levys have understood when to step aside and stay out of the storm's path.
Last week a furor erupted when Condit's p.r.
woman, Marina Ein, was accused of suggesting to reporters that Talk magazine was writing a story that would show Levy had "a history of one-night stands.
" For once, the Levy team stayed nearly silent and let the allegation backfire, which it did when Talk denied that it had uncovered anything of the kind.
And for a day, the airwaves and tabloids were dominated by what the New York Daily News labeled a "Chandra smear campaign."
Says a source close to the family: "We just kind of laid back and let that play out." 
Condit did catch one break last week, when law-enforcement sources said they now believe that Modesto-area minister Otis Thomas--who happened to do landscaping work for the Levys--had fabricated claims that his daughter had had an affair with Condit when she was 18.
What is unclear, investigators say, is whether the Levys, who amplified the charge, had any reason to think Thomas was not telling the truth.
A source who spoke to Susan Levy told TIME she believed his claims were "true and accurate."
But any benefit Condit might have gained from that disclosure was undercut by a report that he had been spotted dumping something in a northern Virginia trash can hours before police were scheduled to search his Washington apartment.
Investigators said they traced the item--a watch case--to a California woman who said she had given it to Condit. 
All of this gives police another set of leads that may or may not get them any closer to figuring out what happened to Chandra Levy.
In keeping the focus on the Congressman, the Levys are betting that at a minimum, Condit is still holding clues that could help them find their daughter.
But they are taking a chance.
If he isn't the key, someone else might be slipping away. 
Three people were killed and six injured after a crash outside a Danish road tunnel set several cars ablaze. 
Police said a truck transporting pigs crashed into the cars outside the Guldborgsund tunnel, 120 kilometers (75 miles) south of the Danish capital of Copenhagen. 
The cause of the accident was not immediately known, although Danish public radio said there was thick fog with a visibility of 10 metrers when the accident happened at 9:40 a.m. (0740 GMT). 
Nine cars were burning and dead pigs were scattered across the highway, according to the radio report quoterd by the Associated Press. 
Several ambulances and fire department vehicles were at the scene, the news agency said. 
The tunnel was immediately closed to traffic. 
Vehicles were diverted across nearby bridges that span across the 200 metre wide Guldborgsund strait. 
The tunnel links the islands of Falster and Lolland.
It is part of the E4 highway from Copenhagen to Roedby, the port for ferry sailings from Denmark to northern Germany.
Congressmen don't usually hang around on the House floor any longer than they have to.
But for Gary Condit, it may be the only sanctuary left.
On Thursday afternoon, as the campaign-reform bill was crashing to earth, so did the rest of his life.
At the back of the chamber, the California Congressman leaned on the rail, chatting and joking with the men and women who still treat him as a colleague.
As the others wandered away one by one, Condit lingered for a while, all alone. 
It is easy to understand why Condit would be reluctant to go outside.
It is now the third month of saturation coverage of the disappearance of Chandra Levy.
While authorities seem no closer to finding out what happened to the 24-year-old intern, we seem to have learned a lot about the secret life of a preacher's kid from Oklahoma who grew up to be a California Congressman.
He once campaigned under the slogan "Setting a Good Example.
" It was a dangerous boast for any public official to make, practically a dare to be proved wrong. 
In the week after Condit finally admitted to police that he had had an affair with Levy, new and ominous information emerged--from investigators, from tabloid sludge to website Drudge, from the incessant talk-show tales told by another "other woman" (a flight attendant with fire-engine red hair) to the claims of a father who said his daughter's fear of her former lover had driven her into hiding.
The Condit legal team fought back, volunteering DNA samples, allowing searches, proffering a polygraph test.
But the recriminations have not stopped, not from the cops, not from the press and certainly not from the Levys. 
Even if Condit had nothing to do with Chandra Levy's disappearance--police continue to insist that he's not a suspect--his painstakingly tended image has been shattered and his political career declared dead.
Democrats and Republicans are already scheming how to carve his conservative district to maximum advantage, or reapportion it out of existence.
"If he's smart, he won't even run for re-election," says A.G. Block, executive editor of California Journal, a magazine on state politics. 
The minister told the Modesto Bee that when news of Levy's disappearance first broke, and Condit, through staff, expressed concern about his "good friend," Jennifer Thomas had shouted at the television, "That's a lie!"
Her father also claimed that he had received an anonymous phone call warning him not to talk.
When reporters showed up at the family doorstep the day his story went public, they were greeted with a handwritten note: "I never met that Congressman who's involved in all this...
I don't even know how both me and my father got mixed up in this.
" It was signed Jennifer Thomas.
Was it really her signature?
Had she had the affair, or was her father seeking the spotlight?
The FBI took the claims seriously enough to question Otis Thomas. 
If Jennifer Thomas was trying to fend off the media glare, flight attendant Anne Marie Smith was getting maximum exposure.
She made the cable-network rounds and spent two days at FBI headquarters in Washington.
Smith's story has grown increasingly sinister.
Her lawyer, Jim Robinson, told Fox News that Smith had found "neckties tied together underneath [Condit's] bed, as if someone had been tied up," and that Smith had grown disturbed near the end of their relationship at some of Condit's "peculiar sexual fantasies."
The lawyer didn't elaborate.
On Friday night, on Larry King Live, Smith declared she had been attracted to Condit because of his personality.
Then she said she would give no more interviews and wanted only to return to her life as a flight attendant. 
As in all such sagas, fact and factitiousness mix indiscriminately.
A friend of the missing intern's told CBS News that when he asked Levy about a recent medical appointment, Levy became awkward.
The friend took the silence to mean that she was "possibly" pregnant.
Hence a whole new line of speculation.
The Levys' attorney, Billy Martin, told CBS News that he knows the truth about her pregnancy but will not give a clue.
As for Levy's father, he expressed "doubt" to the Associated Press that she was pregnant. 
There is one accusation, however, that places Condit in immediate legal jeopardy.
It is Smith's contention that his representatives tried to persuade her to sign a false affidavit that he and she were not involved in a relationship.
Condit has not disputed her contention that they had an affair but denies he pressured her to lie. 
Whether or not he broke the law, Condit has hindered the investigation.
That he first denied the affair--and that it took three interviews with police for him to admit his relationship with Levy--makes him look as if he were more concerned for his reputation than her life.
Almost everything Condit did fueled suspicion that he wasn't being honest.
On June 28, Condit's office gave ABC News a time line of his movements from April 28 to May 2, the five days surrounding Levy's disappearance.
On May 1, the time line indicated, Condit was meeting with a reporter at a "neighborhood coffee shop" at 6:30 p.m.
The problem with that account was that the reporter in question happened to work for ABC as well and told her bosses the meeting actually occurred the following day.
Asked for an explanation of the discrepancy--and for what actually happened at 6:30 on May 1--Condit's office said the time line was only a draft and not complete. 
An ABC News executive says ABC hasn't been able to find out whether the police got the same mistaken time line and, if so, whether it was corrected: "The police have never called [us] to check on this discrepancy." 
The Condit team hopes its surprise announcement Friday that the Congressman has taken a polygraph administered by expert Barry D. Colvert, formerly with the FBI, would soothe critics.
Condit, said his lawyer, Abbe Lowell, had truthfully answered no to the only questions that mattered: Did he have anything to do with Levy's disappearance?
Did he harm her or cause anyone else to?
Does he know where she is?
But neither police nor the Levys were satisfied.
Assistant D.C. police chief Terrance Gainer dubbed the test "self-serving." 
Condit did comply with other requests.
Shortly before dawn on Wednesday, he allowed police to search his apartment for more than three hours.
Condit and Lowell were present as officers took folders and bags into an unmarked police vehicle; several items were sent to the FBI crime lab so that flecks of undetermined substances could be analyzed.
Police with cadaver dogs also began searching nearby abandoned houses. 
That nearly all their leads should be taking investigators toward Condit's innermost life--to the point where the inside of his mouth was swabbed for his DNA--must be a peculiarly hellish torture for a man obsessed with guarding his secrets.
The Hill newspaper quoted police sources as saying Condit had insisted that Levy not carry any identification when they were together--a detail that, if true, could have a connection to the fact that items such as credit cards, her driver's license and other personal articles were left behind in her apartment when she vanished.
Then again, she may simply have been running a quick errand.
And police, while discounting suicide, have not ruled out the possibility that she disappeared intentionally.
They released computer-generated pictures of how Levy might look if she had changed her distinctive hairstyle or other features. 
For all the precautions Condit is said to have taken, and despite the wholesome image he projected at home in Modesto, the Congressman's behavior has always been the subject of gossip among his legislative colleagues--first at the state capital, Sacramento, and later in Washington. "
A flamboyant party boy who uses his prestige as an assemblyman to fuel a busy social life," California Journal had written in 1988.
The pattern continued when he reached Congress. "
His looks and clothes are so important to him," says a friend. "
He so desperately wants to stay young." 
Few in Washington knew much about his wife Carolyn, who had stayed behind in Modesto; many had the impression that she was a near invalid.
But an acquaintance who has known Carolyn Condit for decades told TIME that despite some health problems, she is a vivacious woman.
(She has often made appearances on the Modesto political circuit in her husband's stead.)
"She was always out there," the acquaintance says.
"Even if he wasn't there, she was there for him." 
No one, however, was in evidence Friday afternoon at the Condit family's Modesto-area home, where an American flag hung from the front porch and the only message to passersby was a vividly colored sign: NO TRESPASSING.
For Gary Condit, it's far too late to hope for that.
The nation's postmaster general said Wednesday there is no need to shut down the U.S. Postal Service despite an increasing roster of confirmed and suspected cases of anthrax. 
"We have very defined incidents in four locations around the country," Postmaster General Jack Potter told CNN, referring to cases in New York, Washington, D.C., Florida and New Jersey. 
"I don't believe there is a need to shut down the Postal Service.
Life is filled with risks.
That's not to minimize what's going on here....
If you did, how would you ever open it again? ...
There are no guarantees there is no anthrax anywhere." 
Also on Wednesday, Ernesto Blanco, a Florida man who was among the first diagnosed with inhalation anthrax, was released from the hospital, his family said.
A hospital spokeswoman said he is on a 60-day regimen of Cipro, the antibiotic used most frequently to treat anthrax.
Washington --
Two postal workers from the Brentwood facility, dead from inhalation anthrax.
Is there a connection between the September 11 attacks and the recent anthrax scares?
Where is anthrax produced?
Does anthrax serve any other medical purpose?
Recent anthrax scares across the United States have heightened the anxiety level of a nation still reeling from the terrorist attacks on September 11.
In the days to come, investigators will try to determine whether the anthrax originated domestically or internationally, and whether it is connected to the events of September 11.
Americans should have a "heightened sense of awareness" in the wake of military strikes in Afghanistan, but should not "panic" or alter their normal activities, Attorney General John Ashcroft said Monday. 
Police at all levels, though, have altered their routines since a joint U.S.-British force started aerial assaults in Afghanistan.
Federal, state and local law enforcement agencies have been put on a high state of alert, and are enacting a variety of new security measures across the nation. 
On Monday night, more than 80,000 football fans entering the Pontiac (Michigan) Silverdome for a nationally televised NFL game between the Detroit Lions and the St. Louis Rams were to be searched.
They also were to pass through three security checkpoints. 
Police expected to have 25 to 30 percent more officers on hand to handle the crush, said authorities.
Backpacks, large bags, coolers and even portable radios and TVs have been banned, police said. 
In New York, Gov. George Pataki announced Monday several hundred National Guard troops will be stationed at Grand Central and Penn train stations in New York City to provide additional security and visibility.
The troops were to begin their duties at 6 a.m. Tuesday. 
"We're confident this will give the riding public all the security they need," Pataki said. 
In Washington, Vice President Dick Cheney remained at a secure, undisclosed location away from the White House, two administration officials told CNN. 
He had been scheduled Monday to swear in Tom Ridge as the new director of Homeland Security.
Instead, Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas stepped in to deliver the oath. 
Ridge resigned as Pennsylvania's governor to take the new post, created by President Bush after the September 11 terrorist attacks.
His job will be to close "gaps" in the country's security systems by coordinating the efforts of the scores of federal agencies charged with battling terrorism, Ridge said Monday. 
"The size and scope of this challenge is immense," he said.
"We must protect, prepare for, prevent, protect against, respond to and recover from terrorist attacks." 
At a news briefing Monday, Ashcroft said federal law enforcement has been put on the highest level of alert, and more than 18,000 local law enforcement agencies and 27,000 corporate security managers across the country have been asked to consider whether stricter security measures might be necessary. 
"We are taking strong precautions and other appropriate steps to protect the American people while we win this war," he said. 
While companies that move cargo or goods are being urged to look at their security plans, they are not being encouraged to stop shipments, Ashcroft said. 
"We want secure operations," he said.
"We do not want to cease operations." 
Federal agencies also are continuing a massive investigation into the attacks, Ashcroft said.
So far, 614 people have been arrested or detained, and agents are seeking 229 others, he said.
According to the U.S. State Department, there were 423 international terrorist attacks in 2000, an increase of 8 percent from the 392 attacks in 1999. 
The number of anti-U.S. attacks rose from 169 in 1999 to 200 in 2000, a result of the increase in bombing attacks against a Colombian oil pipeline, viewed by terrorists as a U.S. target. 
Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Sudan and Syria are governments that the U.S. Secretary of State has designated as state sponsors of international terrorism. 
Bin Laden is the prime suspect in the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, and the American public is now learning more about the 17th son of a billionaire Saudi construction magnate. 
CNN terrorism analyst Peter Bergen, who is writing "Holy War Inc.: Inside the Secret World of Osama bin Laden," said the militant Islam bin Laden is "diabolically intelligent." 
Unlike other terrorist groups that have a specific response in mind for its actions, for bin Laden "winning is not the point," Bergen said.
"The outcome itself is not the point.
Osama bin Laden is looking at this as a religious struggle.
If he dies, it's a one-way trip to paradise." 
Bin Laden has stated that terrorism is a tool to achieve the group's goal while working with allied Islamic extremist groups to overthrow regimes it deems "non-Islamic" and to remove Westerners from Muslim countries. 
The biggest group associated with Bin Laden is al Qaeda, a multinational network he established in 1990.
In addition, he is also tied to at least four terrorist groups, according to the U.S. State Department. 
In a report titled "2000 Overview of State-Sponsored Terrorism," the State Department said the United States has been increasingly concerned about reports of Pakistani support to terrorist groups and support for the Taliban, the fundamental Islamic regime controlling most of Afghanistan. 
Last year, U.N. Security Council Resolution 1333 levied additional sanctions on the Taliban, for harboring bin Laden and failing to close down terrorist training camps in that country. 
"Afghanistan is not the only threat, nor the only rallying point for international cooperation," wrote Edmund J. Hull, the U.S. government's acting coordinator for counterterrorism in a State Department report.
He added, "Central Asian states have stepped up their fight against terrorist elements in their region, particularly those operating from Afghanistan." 
Bin Laden, who has several hundred men in Afghanistan employed to protect him, is believed to be receiving help from groups inside Pakistan.
However, Pakistan's leader, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, has sided with the United States in its international coalition against terrorism. 
There are 28 groups that currently are designated by the State Department as international terrorist organizations.
But Bergen says that, counter to popular perception, terrorist organizations are not coming solely out of the Middle East and Asia. 
People "affiliated with al Qaeda have operated in Canada for years -- Canada and Latin America," Bergen said.
There hasn't been much in Darrell Wayne Condit's sad life to distinguish him.
The Florida drifter's rap sheet is a pathetic recitation of offenses so mundane--drugs, robbery, auto theft, driving with a suspended license--they would barely have made the local news pages.
And yet there he was last week on the front page of the New York Post, stringy haired and glassy eyed under a headline demanding:
ASK HIM.
How did he come to figure in the sensational case of the nation's most famous missing person?
Was there any evidence that he had anything to do with the disappearance of Chandra Levy--other than the fact that he happened to be the brother of the Congressman with whom she had had an affair? 
Not a shred, sources close to the Levy family concede.
But the demand by unnamed Levy "family sources" that police find and question Darrell Condit, who was arrested Saturday on an unrelated charge (a DUI parole violation), served its purpose.
It gave reporters a new angle to cover in a case that has been cold almost from the beginning.
And that kept the pressure on police to continue looking for Chandra Levy--and on Congressman Gary Condit to provide whatever he may know about how and why she vanished. 
If there is one reason Chandra Levy's is the only name you recognize among the roughly half a million people reported missing this year across the country, it is the determination of her desperate family to put her in the news and keep her there.
By the standards police apply to most of their cases, Levy's disappearance--for all its sexual intrigue and despite her connection to a powerful politician--would have moved into the background by now.
After three months of saturation coverage, Washington police chief Charles Ramsey says, "we still don't have a hard lead," despite the hundreds of tips that are pouring into police headquarters each week.
Investigators last week were reduced to scouring wooded parkland they had already searched, re-interviewing other tenants of her apartment building and making public information they had had for months in the hope that someone else might see some significance in the websites (Baskin-Robbins, National Geographic) that Levy visited. 
But every time the case has been in any danger of languishing for lack of evidence, the Levy team has put it back in the spotlight by catering to the media's hunger for news in a newsless story.
The family's lawyer, Billy Martin, saw plenty of missing-persons cases fall through the cracks in his 15 years as a federal prosecutor.
From the start, he believed "p.r. was going to be key" to keeping that from happening to Chandra, says a source close to the Levys.
So the team hired the high-powered Washington public relations firm Porter Novelli and later added another p.r.
professional, Judy Smith, with whom Martin had worked when both were representing Monica Lewinsky's family.
Martin, a popular figure with Washington police from his days as an assistant U.S. Attorney, was careful not to put any distance between investigators and the Levys on the public relations front.
That's why the Levy team has not led criticism that police moved too slowly at the outset. 
The Levy team has set the tempo of the coverage, a rhythm as regular as Susan and Robert Levy's appearances before the waiting cameras at the end of their driveway.
After Condit denied the affair in two interviews with police, Levy's aunt and confidant, Linda Zamsky, provided details of their liaison to the Washington Post--details so embarrassing that they rang true. "
It accomplished what we wanted," says one of the Levys' allies.
That night Condit volunteered to do a third interview--the one in which he finally admitted the affair.
The Levys then ramped up their demands, asking that Condit take a lie-detector test; he did so privately (the FBI dismisses the results as useless) and invited police to search his apartment. 
The Levys have understood when to step aside and stay out of the storm's path.
Last week a furor erupted when Condit's p.r.
woman, Marina Ein, was accused of suggesting to reporters that Talk magazine was writing a story that would show Levy had "a history of one-night stands.
" For once, the Levy team stayed nearly silent and let the allegation backfire, which it did when Talk denied that it had uncovered anything of the kind.
And for a day, the airwaves and tabloids were dominated by what the New York Daily News labeled a "Chandra smear campaign."
Says a source close to the family: "We just kind of laid back and let that play out." 
Condit did catch one break last week, when law-enforcement sources said they now believe that Modesto-area minister Otis Thomas--who happened to do landscaping work for the Levys--had fabricated claims that his daughter had had an affair with Condit when she was 18.
What is unclear, investigators say, is whether the Levys, who amplified the charge, had any reason to think Thomas was not telling the truth.
A source who spoke to Susan Levy told TIME she believed his claims were "true and accurate."
But any benefit Condit might have gained from that disclosure was undercut by a report that he had been spotted dumping something in a northern Virginia trash can hours before police were scheduled to search his Washington apartment.
Investigators said they traced the item--a watch case--to a California woman who said she had given it to Condit. 
All of this gives police another set of leads that may or may not get them any closer to figuring out what happened to Chandra Levy.
In keeping the focus on the Congressman, the Levys are betting that at a minimum, Condit is still holding clues that could help them find their daughter.
But they are taking a chance.
If he isn't the key, someone else might be slipping away.
Colombian leftist guerrillas on Thursday freed the last two of three German men whose kidnappings in July strained fragile peace talks, a Red Cross spokesman said. 
Ulrich Kuenzel and Reiner Bruchmann, who were kidnapped together with Kuenzel's brother, Thomas, were released unharmed by rebels of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and handed over to a Red Cross mission in a mountainous area in the southern province of Cauca, spokesman Carlos Rios told Reuters. 
"They are in fine shape under the circumstances.
They were treated well," an official at the German Embassy in Bogota said. 
The release by the FARC, which bankrolls its war on the state with ransom payments from hundreds of kidnappings each year, took place east of the city of Popayan, 240 miles (380 km) southwest of the capital Bogota, the official said . 
Thomas Kuenzel escaped from his captors in a rural district of Cauca Province on September 22 as he took advantage of disarray caused by a military offensive. 
FARC rebels kidnapped the three on July 18 as they were touring rural aid projects in indigenous communities in Cauca. 
European Union countries had said they would end their assistance to peace talks between the government and the FARC until the rebels freed the men. 
The 17,000-member FARC said it wanted to investigate whether the men's work for a German government aid agency was a cover for the U.S.-backed "Plan Colombia" anti-cocaine offensive, which targets cocaine production in rebel-held jungles in the south. 
The FARC is the largest rebel force fighting in the South American nation's 37-year-old war, which has killed 40,000 people in the past decade alone. 
European countries, which have criticized Washington's $1 billion in mostly military aid to Colombia, are spending hundreds of millions of dollars in social and development programs in the country. 
They have also participated in 3-year-old peace talks between the FARC and the Colombian government, which the United States has boycotted since February 1999, when rebels killed three U.S. Indian activists. 
Colombia's Foreign Minister Guillermo Fernandez de Soto welcomed Thursday's liberation, saying it "opened a new space for international cooperation as required by the international community and the government." 
Peace talks, which began in January 1999, have failed to end the bloodshed. 
Rebels and common criminals together kidnapped almost 4,000 people in Colombia last year, giving the country by far the world's highest kidnapping rate. 
Last week, the FARC -- a 1960s peasant army that says it is fighting for socialist revolution -- announced it would end its mass roadside kidnappings as part of a deal with the government to rescue the peace negotiations. 
The military accused the FARC on Tuesday of breaking its latest pledge, saying it abducted six motorists, including two policeman, over the weekend. 
A FARC commander said the policemen had been "executed" after rebels alleged they were members of right-wing militias. 
Copyright 2001 Reuters .
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
Even before he was declared President-elect, George W. Bush had become bear in chief.
For weeks he's been warning that the U.S. economy is in for hard times.
He may steer clear himself of the term recession. "
Possible slowdown" is one way he puts it.
But dirty work is what Vice Presidents are for.
So Dick Cheney has been sent out to say the forbidden word.
As early as Dec. 3, he was on Meet the Press warning that the nation "may well be on the front edge of a recession." 
Why would Bush be willing to spook the economy he's about to inherit?
For starters, he needs to spread the idea that if things get tight for a while, the problem started before he took office.
The last recession occurred during his father's presidency.
He doesn't want the next one called Bush 2.
But he also hopes to use the prospect of trouble ahead as a rationale for his proposal to cut taxes by $1.6 trillion over the next 10 years.
As he said last month, "A tax-relief plan for everybody serves as an insurance policy against a potential economic downturn." 
It was to underline his worries about a downturn that Bush scheduled his economic forum in Austin, Texas, this week, a round table with selected economists to get their take on things.
Though they aren't likely to say so at the forum, one worry many economists have is that Bush's warnings will become a self-fulfilling prophecy, trash talking a wobbly economy right off the rails. 
Then again, he and Cheney are just enlarging on what everybody is already thinking--that even if we can avoid a real recession, meaning two consecutive quarters in which the economy shrinks, a slowdown in the rapid growth of the '90s is plainly in store.
The dwindling NASDAQ says it all.
If those sputtering dotcoms are the economic engines of the future, then the future's just not what it used to be. 
Bush's bearishness may also reflect the influence of his chief economic adviser Larry Lindsey.
The former Federal Reserve governor has been sour for so long on the economy's prospects that he cashed out all his stocks in 1997, when the Dow Jones average was still at 8,500.
And for Lindsey, a dedicated supply sider, the remedy for recession just happens to be a tax cut.
Most economists insist, however, that tax cuts have very little effect on recessions, largely because their benefits kick in too late to affect the problem.
To pre-empt his critics, Bush could redesign his proposal to provide accelerated benefits.
One possibility being discussed among his advisers would be to change the formula by which payroll taxes are withheld, as his father did in 1992.
That would put extra cash in taxpayer pockets quickly. 
Another reason the Bush tax cut may not have much impact is that its biggest parts, like across-the-board rate reductions, are the ones least likely to sail through a sharply divided Congress.
And the pieces that are easiest to pass, like an end to the marriage penalty for joint filers, are too small to do much to stimulate consumer spending.
Democrats have accepted the inevitability of some kind of tax reduction's passing Congress this year.
House minority leader Dick Gephardt has already said so.
But none of them is prepared to support cuts of the size that Bush is looking for.
Meanwhile, they are casting around among smaller-scale ideas. 
Democrats are also planning to stick to the argument that a big tax cut means you can forget about using the burgeoning federal budget surplus to pay down the national debt.
In an adroit bit of political gamesmanship, Bill Clinton played up the goal of debt elimination last week when he unveiled new White House budget calculations that show the total surplus over the next 10 years rising to nearly $5 trillion, an $800 billion increase over the last estimate issued just six months ago.
"We should be shooting for a debt-free America by the end of the decade," he said.
But Bush and his team say the skyrocketing surplus is evidence that a tax cut is not only necessary but affordable. 
In the view of many economists, interest-rate modifications are better than tax cuts as a way of combating slowdowns, in which case the main weapon of recession fighting would rest with Greenspan.
All the same, Bush is hoping that he can get the Fed chairman to signal in some way that he too would agree to a big slice, perhaps during his upcoming testimony before Congress.
Greenspan thinks the surplus should be used to pay down the national debt, but he would accept seeing some of it go back as a tax cut before he would allow Congress to use it for more spending programs. 
Bush's adviser Lindsey is a good friend of the Fed chairman's.
So are Cheney and Paul O'Neill, Bush's choice as Treasury Secretary.
Both worked with Greenspan in Gerald Ford's White House.
All of them will be going to work on Greenspan to persuade him that Congress would simply spend the surplus before it can be used for bill paying.
And George W., whose father had notoriously frosty relations with Greenspan, has gone out of his way to court the chairman.
A few weeks ago, after their get-acquainted meeting in Washington, he even squeezed the uncomfortable-looking Greenspan on camera.
But when you start talking like the bears, as Bush has been doing, maybe bear hugs are just what come naturally.
Going to unprecedented lengths to make amends to Japan, the Navy has devoted more than $60 million and thousands of hours to recovering the bodies of nine Japanese men and boys killed when a surfacing U.S. submarine sank their fishing boat. 
As of Friday, divers had recovered eight of the bodies from the wreck of the Ehime Maru. 
The USS Greeneville ripped through the hull of the Ehime Maru on February 9 as the nuclear-powered sub demonstrated an emergency surfacing drill for 16 civilian guests off Oahu.
Twenty-six boys and men aboard the fishing boat survived.
Three crewmen, two teachers and four student fishermen did not. 
The collision outraged the victims' families and soured relations with Japan.
The Navy quickly apologized and, in an effort to show its remorse, began mapping how to retrieve the victims' bodies for their families. 
Never before had the Navy recovered a ship the size of the 830-ton Ehime Maru from so great a depth. 
After months of planning, engineers lifted the wreck from the ocean floor in 2,000 feet of water.
Then the Navy used a heavy-duty oil rigger ship to tow the Ehime Maru underwater 16 miles, at a speed of less than 1 knot, to 115-foot waters so divers could enter the wreck. 
Since mid-October, 66 U.S. and Japanese divers have descended to search for remains and personal effects among the dislodged mattresses, tables and other debris in the sunken vessel's dark compartments. 
"They're very dedicated, and their spirits are up because they know this is very important," said Capt. Christopher Murray, the Navy's supervisor of diving.
"They want to finish this and do the best job they can." 
The diving continued Friday as the Honolulu medical examiner's office identified the remains of Hiroshi Makisawa, 37, an instructor on the training ship operated by Uwajima Fisheries High School. 
Makisawa's remains were recovered October 19.
Seven of the Ehime Maru victims have now been identified. 
His widow, Mika Makisawa, wears his platinum wedding band recovered from the wreck on her finger -- next to her own. 
"More than clothing or shoes, this is something he always wore," she said.
"I'm happy I can be with him always." 
Makisawa told the Honolulu Star-Bulletin that she has not been able to tell her 4-year-old son about the death.
The boy has been eagerly waiting months for his father to return from the fishing trip. 
"The accident happened and we can't reverse that," she said, "So I have to live positively and look ahead.
Unless I forgive, the person who suffers is me." 
The submarine's skipper, Cmdr.
Scott Waddle, was reprimanded and agreed to retire from the Navy at full rank and pension after disciplinary proceedings.
Four other crewmen were disciplined. 
After a rare court of inquiry, U.S. Pacific Fleet commander Adm. Thomas Fargo found that Waddle rushed his crew through preparations for the drill and performed an insufficient periscope sweep.
But Fargo did not recommend a court-martial, which upset family members again. 
The Navy has done well in respecting the Japanese families through the recovery and by accepting blame, said George Tanabe Jr., a University of Hawaii professor who specializes in Japanese religions. 
"Having done that, the feeling is to bring honor to themselves, take responsibility and make some kind of amends, even though it can't take away the tragedy," he said.
"They are particularly motivated and committed not only to do it, but do it right." 
Tanabe briefed the divers and Navy officials about the sensitivities involved at the request of Rear Adm. William Klemm, the operation's commander. 
"Admiral Klemm's feeling was that even if it was a technical success, the whole thing could fail if they did something upset the families," Tanabe said. 
Recovering the bodies is especially important to the Japanese because they consider the body and soul as one, he said. 
The divers, who are living on a barge above the wreckage a mile offshore, have experience recovering bodies from airplane crashes, but they feel a special weight in their current mission.
This time, they are searching for students who shared their aspirations of becoming seamen. 
Once the Navy's recovery operation is completed, the Ehime Maru will be towed six miles out to sea and allowed to sink in 6,000 feet of water. 
Copyright 2001
The Associated Press .
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
Confirmation Fight Mitch Frank
WHAT ARE THE ISSUES... 
The million-dollar question: Why did Ashcroft lead the charge to defeat Justice Ronnie White's nomination to the federal bench?
Because White was soft on the death penalty?
Because he was black?
Or because, as a state legislator, White killed an Ashcroft-backed abortion ban? 
In a 1998 interview in Southern Partisan, Ashcroft praised the neo-Confederate magazine for defending "Southern patriots" like Jefferson Davis and Stonewall Jackson.
The magazine has long argued slavery was beneficial to blacks. 
Ashcroft went to Bob Jones University to accept an honorary degree in 1999.
Did he know about the school's ban on interracial dating?
Does he really believe, as he said that day, that the school honors the principle that all men are created equal? 
He helped defeat James Hormel's nomination to be ambassador to Luxembourg because Hormel is openly gay, arguing Hormel would promote a sinful lifestyle. 
In the Senate, Ashcroft sponsored the Human Life amendment, which would have defined life as beginning at fertilization--barring abortion and some forms of contraception. 
Ashcroft fought Surgeon General David Satcher's nomination because Satcher did not support a partial-birth-abortion ban. 
Ashcroft once wrote, "If I had the opportunity to pass but a single law, I would fully recognize the constitutional right to life of every unborn child, and ban every abortion except for those medically necessary to save the life of the mother." 
Ashcroft campaigned for a '99 Missouri referendum to allow concealed weapons. 
In the Senate, he voted against safety locks,the assault-weapons ban and closing the gun-show loophole.
The National Rifle Association has been one of his strongest financial backers. ...
AND WHAT'S AT STAKE? 
George W. Bush could have avoided a lot of headaches if he had nominated John Ashcroft to be Secretary of Agriculture.
Because the Attorney General plays such a critical role in any Administration, Ashcroft's opponents felt they could not sit still.
As the nation's top lawyer and top cop, the Attorney General oversees an enormous network of law-enforcement officers and attorneys, supervising the FBI, the INS, the DEA, the Witness Protection Program and the U.S. Marshals.
As chief attorney, he prosecutes everything from tax fraud to money laundering to illegal gun sales to patent violations. 
With such a vast fief, every AG must decide where to devote limited money and manpower.
The Carter Justice Department focused on white-collar crime.
Four years later, Ronald Reagan's zeroed in on organized crime and drugs.
Ashcroft's opponents question whether he will diligently prosecute civil rights violations, which include not only discrimination but also blocking access to abortion clinics.
Will big polluters face environmental prosecution?
Will Ashcroft press the government's case against Microsoft as the company appeals? 
What may frighten Ashcroft's detractors most is the role he will have in appointing judges to the federal bench.
Although the President has the final word, the Attorney General has a big hand in selecting candidates.
With the recent Supreme Court decision fresh in the nation's mind, the importance of lifetime appointees to the bench is clear to both sides. --M.F.
Lynne Cheney has never cared for the niceties of politics.
Brash, outspoken and proud of her prickly intelligence, she has written five books, co-hosted CNN's Crossfire, chaired the National Endowment for the Humanities and consistently enraged liberals with her conservative views on feminism, education and political correctness.
So it's only natural that the wife of Vice President-elect Dick Cheney is again breaking into new territory and raising some eyebrows.
After a temporary leave of absence from her career during the campaign, Cheney last week announced that she will do what no presidential or vice-presidential spouse has done before: she will work outside the home.
She will get paid for it.
And she will not apologize. 
After her husband is sworn in, Cheney will return to her positions on the boards of Reader's Digest and AXP Mutual, a subsidiary of American Express.
Citing time constraints, she has resigned from the boards of two other firms--including defense contractor Lockheed Martin--but will continue her association with the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative Washington think tank.
And why not?
At 59, Cheney has a life.
"I have worked in some fashion my whole life," she told TIME.
"It would seem as if I were turning into someone who was not me if I were to take another path." 
But Cheney's path has obvious perils.
Many accomplished couples, including members of Congress, navigate this tricky terrain, a place where one spouse's success can create conflicts of interest for the other.
But the stakes are higher at the top.
When Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton accepted an $8 million book advance from Simon & Schuster, she was criticized for profiting from both her marriage and the largesse of a company with issues before Congress.
And Cheney will be paid by corporations that may sooner or later lobby her husband's Administration.
She was wise to drop her affiliation with Lockheed Martin, a corporation with much to gain from Bush Administration decisions, but American Express has its own lobbying outfit on Capitol Hill and spends hundreds of thousands of dollars trying to persuade politicians to vote its way on tax and banking issues. 
In 2001, company spokesmen told TIME, Cheney's compensation from the two boards will total more than $150,000 in cash and stock.
And she does not rule out accepting additional posts in the future.
To be sure, there's nothing illegal about remaining on the boards.
Says Charles Lewis of Washington's Center for Public Integrity: "It's a perception issue, not a legal one.
It doesn't look so good if she is out there schmoozing with the captains of industry who are benefiting from her stature while her husband is deciding policy that might affect these companies." 
"You don't want to tell people they can't have a life," says Jamie Gorelick, Deputy Attorney General in the Clinton Administration.
"The [challenge] is to square that life with the responsibilities of the spouse.
How does [Dick] Cheney recuse himself from questions that affect her board?" 
Lynne Cheney dismisses such worries.
"I am not concerned about that," she says.
"I will continue to be a responsible scholar and a responsible spokesman and a responsible board member and to keep my life separate from my husband's."
George W. Bush has argued that his $1.6 trillion tax-cut plan would help America dodge a recession.
But because its most generous provisions don't kick in until after 2003, the President's proposal can't provide much countercyclical punch before then.
Democrats, who oppose the measure as too large and too favorable to the rich, several weeks ago called for $60 billion to $80 billion in tax cuts this year, many of them targeted at middle- and low-income groups.
The idea: offer people some money now so they'll spend and give the economy a boost. 
G.O.P. legislators began moving that way last week.
As the stock market continued to swoon amid more negative economic news, Pete Domenici, chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, proposed handing taxpayers a $60 billion rebate in 2001.
It's not clear what form that might take: the IRS could simply send out rebate checks, or, even quicker, the government might lower the amounts automatically withheld from workers' pay.
Rebates would probably be treated as taxable income, which would reduce both their economic clout and public relations appeal.
Evenly divided among the country's 200 million adult taxpayers, they could be worth $300 a head.
Bush has said he supports the idea, and so does Tom Daschle, the Democratic leader of the Senate. 
In the House of Representatives, which has approved a partial version of Bush's tax scheme, the Ways and Means committee last week voted for its own version of immediate relief.
The plan would double the $500-per-child tax credit and make it available to as many as 3 million families that currently pay no income tax, earning from $20,000 to $30,000 a year.
In a rare move, Democratic Senator Kent Conrad asked Congress to pass some version of these proposals by the first week of April.
Senate majority leader Trent Lott offered a more leisurely schedule, calling for their consideration as part of a multi-year tax-cut package, perhaps as soon as Memorial Day. 
The timing could make all the difference.
If Congress approves $60 billion in cuts right away to bolster the economy, lawmakers will face less pressure to pass Bush's $1.6 trillion tax package later.
Two moderate Republicans in the Senate have already called the President's plan excessive, and with the Senate split 50-50 between the parties, the legislation may not have enough votes to pass in current form.
But if the G.O.P. can sweeten Bush's tax bill by adding $60 billion in cuts for 2001, Republicans could get more of what they want in a single piece of legislation. 
Either way, the congressional rush toward immediate tax relief is likely to have more political than economic impact.
For America's $10 trillion economy, a $60 billion tax reduction would offer mostly a psychological lift.
But both Congress and the White House are betting that even if wallets don't get a whole lot fatter, the cut will make consumers think Washington is doing something for them.
Members of the House International Relations Committee Wednesday criticized the Bush administration in unusually harsh language for opposing Israeli targeted killings while it hunts down suspected terrorist mastermind Osama bin Laden "dead or alive." 
Rep. Gary Ackerman, D-New York, the ranking Democrat on the Subcommittee on the Middle East and Asia, said it was inconsistent for the United States to denounce Israel when "they go after the miserable SOBs [who launch terrorist attacks against Israel] ... and they have every bit as much evidence as we have" for the September 11 terrorist attacks. 
The comments came at a hearing in which Assistant Secretary for Near East Affairs William Burns testified on the administration's policies in the Middle East, both relating to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and in the U.S. war against terrorism. 
"If an American pilot ... would succeed through targeted assassination to kill Osama bin Laden, he would get the Congressional Medal of Honor and a ticker tape parade down Fifth Avenue," said Rep. Tom Lantos, D-California. 
"And I'm just wondering what degree of hypocrisy prompts a State Department spokesman to criticize an Israeli sharpshooter for successfully putting an end to the life of a man who planned, organized and directed the assassination of 22 Israeli teenagers." 
Lantos was referring to the shooting death of Abed Rahman Hamad by Israeli snipers on Sunday.
According to the Israelis, Hamad organized the June suicide bombing at a Tel Aviv disco. 
The Bush administration criticized the shooting, saying it opposes Israeli's practice of targeted killings of Palestinians it believes to be responsible for terrorist attacks. 
Rep. Elliot Engel, D-New York, said he was "furious" with what he called the "double standard" the Bush administration uses to distinguish its own efforts to combat terrorism. 
"Does anyone doubt that if we today could take out Osama bin Laden -- as President Bush said, 'Wanted dead or alive' -- if we could take out Osama bin Laden, and the only way we could get him is dead, do we have any doubt that we would take that choice?"
Engel asked. "
No," Burns replied, but made a distinction between the U.S. targeting of bin Laden and Israel's killing of Palestinians. 
"What we are trying to do is ... create a situation which violence is brought to an end," Burns said.
"In the context of this situation between Israelis and Palestinians, there is the possibility of getting together a political process." 
Burns' remarks came as the Bush administration condemned the assassination of right-wing Israeli Cabinet minister Rechavam Zeevi on Wednesday. 
While the United States offered its condolences and called on Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat to arrest those responsible, the administration said the shooting should not divert recent positive steps being taken by the Israelis and Palestinians to calm the situation. 
The committee also called on the administration to go after Palestinian terrorist groups in its war against terrorism and to crack down on Syria for its support of the Hezbollah. 
"Surely these groups threaten American foreign policy interests in this time of crisis, and yet they appear to have been deliberately overlooked," Ackerman said.
"I don't understand the special carve-out."
Ben Nelson has been in the senate for all of two months, but he knows what the George W. Bush treatment feels like.
Not just the win-a-little-nickname treatment (Bush dubbed him Nellie) but a far more punishing one--the kind that can make a politician sweat.
A Democrat and former Governor of Nebraska, Nelson was onstage with Bush at the Omaha Civic Center last Wednesday when the President set about tickling the crowd of almost 4,000.
Pointing out both Nelson and his Republican colleague, Chuck Hagel, Bush declared, "I know that when it comes to doing the right thing, they'll listen to the people of Nebraska."
As the crowd roared and waved miniature American flags, Nelson turned his frozen smile to Hagel.
"You haven't come out for his tax plan yet, have you?
" he asked. "
Well, no," Hagel said, laughing. "
But is there any doubt I will?" 
Nellie, you're on your own.
The Senator won his seat last fall by the narrowest margin in state history.
Bush, who crushed Gore by 30 points in Nebraska, was sending a clear message: a vote against the tax cut would be a vote against a President who was more popular in Nebraska than Nelson.
It might even be political suicide. 
That's the kind of candygram that Bush is delivering to more than a dozen vulnerable Senators--men and women who will make the difference in the coming battle over Bush's tax cuts.
A small handful of Republicans could defect and the President will need to peel off an equal number of Democrats to ensure passage of his program.
Last week, after delivering his big budget address to Congress, he swept into Arkansas and Georgia, where Democrats Blanche Lincoln and Max Cleland felt the love.
This week Bush will swing through Louisiana and North Dakota, two more states he won handily--and where Democratic Senators hang on to their jobs by hewing to local opinion.
Even Tom Daschle, the Senate minority leader, whose job is to rally the opposition, won't be spared.
Bush plans to visit Daschle's G.O.P.-leaning home state of South Dakota this week. 
To hear Bush describe his budget, you'd think Nelson and the others would all be jumping up and shouting "Hallelujah!"
As Bush tells it, we can afford guns and butter, higher spending and lower taxes, missile defense and a prescription-drug benefit, Social Security forever.
After a month that felt more like the ninth season of the Clinton Show than the first of Bush's, the new President's address last Tuesday had the air of a second Inauguration.
In a real sense, it marked the beginning of his presidency, the moment when the new guy started filling his suit.
The performance was, well, Clintonian in its easy embrace of the other party's ideas--more funding for education and health research, protection for national parks, even an end to racial profiling--headed up by John Ashcroft, no less. 
The tone was so warm and comforting that you had to endure a fistful of paper cuts while going through Bush's 207-page budget blueprint to feel its chilly austerity.
The document makes it clear that Bush's true inspiration is not Bill Clinton but Ronald Reagan--the last President to promise a mammoth tax cut.
Bush's task is, if anything, more daunting than Reagan's was 20 years ago.
The Gipper was elected at a time of mounting deficits with a mandate to cut government down to size--yet never came close to taming the beast.
Bush avoids Reagan's sharp rhetoric and is governing without a mandate during a time of surpluses, yet he proposes to hold federal spending to a 4% increase overall, barely more than the rate of inflation.
That sounds "reasonable and responsible," as he says, but in fact it is wildly ambitious, even radical.
Congress boosted spending more than 8% last year, and even Republican committee chairmen can't imagine living on less than a 6% hike this year. "
In the last couple of Congresses, everyone got drunk on a spending binge," says a senior Bush aide.
"They scratched the President's back, and Clinton scratched theirs." 
The idea of making hard choices--of cutting some departments deeply in order to free up money for others--is commonplace in the private sector, where Bush's lieutenants lately toiled, but the Capitol calculators have different buttons.
In the past, those who have tried to bring real-world discipline to Washington have gone away dizzy.
The White House insists this time will be different.
Aides say Bush will veto any spending that busts his 4% cap. 
The President's team knows how fierce the political battle will be.
Bush has a lower approval rating than any other new President in 50 years.
And after 18 months of selling his tax-cut plan, he has yet to inspire a national sing-along.
So White House political guru Karl Rove is surveying his battle maps and strategic-planning calendars to orchestrate a multi-week sales tour mixing the hucksterism and pageantry of a presidential campaign with a strong undercurrent of blackmail.
The focus is on the Senate, with its 50-50 split between parties (the House, Bush aides say, is a slam dunk).
Six of the targeted Democrats are up for re-election in 2002.
Says a gleeful Bush official: "These Senators are going to hear about it at home." 
The idea, White House political director Ken Mehlman told a group of G.O.P. state legislators in a conference call last Thursday, is to re-create what happened during Bush's Inauguration speech.
When the President mentioned his $1.6 trillion tax cut, politicians on the Capitol steps clapped politely.
But out on the damp and muddy Mall, the crowd whooped and hollered louder than at any other moment of the speech.
Hearing that, the politicians amped up their own applause.
To turn up the grass-roots volume, Bush is getting help from groups like Americans for Tax Reform, whose founder, Grover Norquist, organized Mehlman's conference call.
In coming weeks, Norquist promises, many G.O.P.-controlled state legislatures will vote to send resolutions to Washington directing their Senators to vote for the President's plan. 
Some of the targeted Senators are fighting back.
When Daschle heard that the President would be dropping in to his state, the minority leader challenged him to a tax-cut- and-budget debate on local TV.
(Bush declined.)
Democrats are eager to engage because their polls show that Bush had a strong night in his first presidential address.
Bush's individual proposals are immensely popular, but he has been unable to assuage public fears that his numbers don't add up.
Bush's tax cut, Daschle warned, "will consume nearly all of the available surplus--at the expense of prescription-drug coverage, education, defense and other critical priorities.
" 
The skepticism is justified.
Plenty of voters remember the dark side of Reagan's legacy--record deficits the country is still paying off.
When politicians tell Americans they can have it all, they have learned to say, "There they go again."
To counter that reaction, the President insisted all week that his budget sets aside $1 trillion of the projected surplus for "contingencies."
But on closer inspection that contingency fund looks like a bottomless till, a way to pretend to pay for a host of Bush initiatives that will end up costing far more. 
During the campaign, Bush rarely talked about debt reduction.
But last week paying down $2 trillion of the national debt suddenly became one of his "major initiatives.
" The reason: internal polls told Bush strategists that the public wants debt reduction at least as much as, if not more than, a tax cut.
"We knew we had to change the argument from tax cut or debt relief to tax cuts and debt relief," says a Bush aide.
But although the President's rhetoric changed, his plan did not.
He came up with no money for paying down debt beyond the Social Security payroll-tax revenues, which both parties have unanimously agreed should never be used for anything else. 
Hoping to jump-start the economy, Bush is calling for part of his tax cut to be retroactive to Jan. 1--without factoring the added cost into his budget.
Unless there is some tinkering, that will surely increase the cost above his cap of $1.6 trillion, which means Bush will have to decide where to compromise--by fiddling with the pace at which cuts take effect, reducing rates by less than he has proposed, or reducing rather than killing the estate tax. 
But for now, compromise is looking less probable.
Despite all the talk of changing the tone in Washington, Republicans and Democrats are back to their old spitting and bickering.
Last week Republicans rammed a version of Bush's across-the-board income tax cut through the House Ways and Means Committee on a party-line vote.
A full House vote is scheduled for this week.
Even Democrats who appeared likely to support Bush were complaining that they had been railroaded into considering tax cuts before the budget had been hammered out or the program cuts even announced.
Bush was pleased by the pace and hoped that the sense of momentum would put more pressure on fence-sitting Democrats and moderate Republicans.
It may not. "
He has to be willing to work with us," says Arkansas Senator Blanche Lincoln, another Democrat who got the Bush treatment last week when he visited Little Rock.
"It can't be his way or no way."
Florida -- Robert Stevens, photo editor at American Media Inc. in Boca Raton, died of inhalation anthrax. 
Washington --
Two postal workers -- Joseph Curseen Jr. and Thomas Morris Jr. -- died of inhalation anthrax.
Both worked at the Brentwood processing center. 
New York -- Kathy Nguyen, hospital supply room worker, died of inhalation anthrax. 
Washington --
Two other Brentwood workers, inhalation anthrax. 
Washington area -- State Department mailroom employee, inhalation anthrax. 
Florida -- Ernesto Blanco, who worked in same building as Robert Stevens, diagnosed with inhalation anthrax; released from hospital on October 24. 
New Jersey -- Two Hamilton Township postal workers, inhalation anthrax. 
New York-- Female assistant to NBC Nightly News anchor Tom Brokaw; infant son of ABC News producer; female assistant to CBS News anchor Dan Rather; unidentified person. 
New Jersey -- West Trenton postal worker; Hamilton Township mail processing employee; Hamilton Township bookkeeper. 
Although health officials feared that inhalation anthrax would nearly always be fatal, doctors have saved several anthrax victims.
Meanwhile, federal agencies are still checking various facilities for the presence of the bacteria, and officials are hustling to make sure antibiotics are available to those who may have been exposed to anthrax.
This just in: Last week George W. Bush was the most popular political leader in Europe.
That, at least, is one interpretation of the demonstrations in the Swedish town of Goteborg.
On the day of Bush's visit for a summit meeting with the leaders of the 15 nations in the European Union, the most significant street protest was a mass mooning of the President.
But once Bush had left for Warsaw, and then for a meeting in Ljubljana, Slovenia, with Russian President Vladimir Putin, the mood turned ugly.
The now familiar demonstrators against globalization tossed cobblestones at police, burned cars and smashed windows.
Unable to move freely through the streets, the European leaders were forced to hold their customary dinner in the cordoned-off conference center rather than a classy restaurant.
And police opened fire with live rounds, wounding three protesters, one of them seriously. 
So much for the values gap.
In the run-up to Bush's trip, commentators had enjoyed viewing a supposed chasm between the sensibilities of modern Europe and those of the U.S.
To believe some, one side of the Atlantic opposed the death penalty, was committed to arms control and wanted to save the planet; the other executed people for fun, was looking forward to a new arms race and thought global warming a minor inconvenience compared with doing without its SUVs.
Strange, then, that the first live bullets used in the wave of recent protests against global capitalism should have been fired not in Seattle or Washington but in peace-loving, tree-hugging, social-democratic Scandinavia.
Americans, it turns out, do not have a monopoly on mindless violence, nor Europeans one on the Cartesian application of enlightened reason to the great issues of the day. 
Even before the riots, Bush's staff had drawn the appropriate conclusions.
"I don't think there is a values gap," said a senior Administration official who was on the trip.
"
The shared values between Americans and Europeans vastly and dramatically outweigh any differences.
There are anti-death penalty Americans; there are people in the U.S. who think [the Kyoto protocol on global warming] was a great thing."
Antony Blinken, a staff member on Bill Clinton's National Security Council, points out that it wasn't that long ago that Europeans and Americans had serious disagreements over basic matters--like the modernization of nuclear arsenals in Europe.
After the cold war and the triumph of global capitalism, he says, we live in a period marked by the "narcissism of small differences." 
But Blinken was talking about Washington's old allies in Western Europe.
The surprise of the trip was the apparent warmth between Bush and Putin.
Sure, both sides wanted their first summit to be a success and so played down their old disagreements on missile defense and on Bush's determination to extend NATO membership to the Baltic states--and hence to Russia's border.
But the post-meeting atmosphere was cozier than many had expected.
Bush said he found Putin to be "very straightforward and trustworthy."
"Everybody tries to read the body language," said the President.
"Mark me down as very pleased."
Putin, for his part, said that "the differences in the positions of our countries are not of a fundamental nature" and that he was delighted that Bush spoke of Russia as a partner and potential ally. 
In such a world, where disputes are between friends, old or new, Bush would have had to do something dramatically awful for his trip to be marked a failure.
He didn't.
Indeed, so low were the expectations of him among parts of the European media that merely by showing up and speaking English--never mind the basic Spanish that he used when visiting Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar in Madrid--he would have been judged a resounding success.
He sailed over that low bar.
From the U.S. standpoint, the week's only truly sour note had nothing to do with the President's performance.
It came, rather, with a surprise announcement by Jack Welch, chairman and CEO of General Electric Co.
The conditions that the E.U.'s competition authorities wished to place on GE's merger with Honeywell International, Welch said, were deal breakers.
Bush may have sympathized, but he did not make the GE deal part of his official business. 
By and large, those meetings went as well as could be expected.
Bush's advisers thought discussions with NATO allies in Brussels were a success.
NATO's drab offices are the closest thing to home turf that an American President ever finds in Europe--a place where the history, might and technological prowess of the U.S. give it an unrivaled position of leadership.
Bush made his case for missile defense with vigor and without notes, and at the press conference following the meeting, seemed pumped and confident.
To an extent, that makes sense.
He has won converts in Europe;
the governments of Spain and Italy--as well as new NATO members Poland and Hungary--are all inclined to support Bush's belief that the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty is a tired relic of the cold war that deserves no more than a decent burial. 
The discussions in Sweden, at the semiannual summit between the E.U. and the U.S., were bound to be trickier--and were.
On their own territory--Bush was the first sitting U.S. President ever to visit Sweden--the Europeans set the agenda, which consisted mainly of beating up on Bush for his decision to junk the Kyoto accord.
Climate change dominated both the formal meeting and the dinner that evening in Goteborg's town hall.
Bush, said an Administration official, found the dinner a "long two hours." 
He had better get used to it; with European leaders under electoral pressure to show green hearts, global warming will feature at summits for years to come.
And so, for all the grips and grins in Ljubljana, will missile defense.
Bush has asked Secretary of State Colin Powell and Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld to work with their Russian counterparts on a "new security framework."
Those talks won't be easy; Washington may have changed the dismissive, almost contemptuous tone in which it discussed Moscow earlier in the year, but Putin has deeply held positions on missile defense and NATO enlargement--and powerful constituencies who will see that he sticks to them. 
So future meetings between the Americans and the Russians are certain to be tougher than the one last week, and Bush's relationship with the West Europeans will continue to have its fraught moments.
The values gap between Europe and the U.S. may be smaller than many think, but there are two senses in which the Atlantic dialogue is moving onto new and, for Americans, unfamiliar ground.
The first involves the growing economic power of the European Union.
Welch allowed that he was "surprised" by the demands made by Mario Monti, the E.U.'s antitrust commissioner, which only goes to show that one of America's most respected CEOs can't always be well informed.
The E.U. has been exercising jurisdiction over mergers between non-European firms for more than a decade, and under Monti's leadership has taken an aggressive line on anything that seems to dilute competition.
That's part of a larger picture.
Whether it's in world-trade talks, international rules on computer privacy or standards for food safety and labeling, American companies are increasingly finding that the rules of the globalization game are at least as likely to be set in Brussels as in Washington. 
More significantly, U.S. policymakers, for the first time, have to cope with "European" attitudes toward economics, the environment and even defense that is just that--European.
The E.U. is slowly but surely turning into something less than a nation state but much more than a trading club.
Even its leaders who are "pro-American"--like Aznar--have staked their future on turning the E.U. into a true political force. 
Americans will find it easier to cope with such a development if Europeans are modest about their own habits.
Whatever may have been true before last week, this is hardly the time for Europeans to claim they are more virtuous than the gun-loving, arrogant Americans.
Ask the police and the demonstrators in Goteborg what they think of European values.
With military action under way in Afghanistan, the next major challenge facing Congress is passage of a stimulus package to repair America's economy, Democratic Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle said Saturday. 
Daschle, D-South Dakota, said there is room for compromise between members of his party, many of whom support authorizing $50 billion in aid, and the Bush administration, which has suggested that $75 billion might be needed. 
"Once again, we are asked to put aside politics and work for the good of the nation," he said, delivering the Democrats' weekly radio address. 
The GOP and Democratic leaders of the House and Senate budget committees have endorsed a set of principles for an economic package, Daschle said.
They agree that any measures must be temporary -- to avoid increasing the national debt and pushing up interest rates and housing costs; have an immediate impact; be fiscally responsible; and include a mix of tax cuts and investments. 
According to Daschle, economists have said that the most effective and fastest way to boost consumer spending and business investment would be to help victims of the terrorist attacks, including more than 150,000 airline workers and thousands of other employees in other industries who have lost their jobs. 
"So helping them with unemployment and health-care benefits, payroll tax rebates and other consumer-related measures isn't just the decent thing to do, it's the smart thing to do," he said. 
The push for an economic stimulus package to help the nation's economy rebound from the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington has in recent days uncovered some of the partisan fissures in Congress that had receded in the swell of national unity that followed the September 11 attacks. 
On Friday, Republicans in the House of Representatives unveiled their own $100 billion economic stimulus bill, but Democrats complained the bill was not a joint, bipartisan effort. 
The House GOP bill provides about $70 billion in corporate tax relief and about $30 billion in tax cuts for individuals in fiscal year 2002.
It includes rebates for Americans who did not receive any check this summer -- a measure meant to appease Democrats. 
"In the face of layoffs, tumbling corporate profits, falling stock markets and shakier consumer confidence, no doubt remains that this legislation is needed," said House Ways and Means Chairman Bill Thomas, R-California. 
In the Senate, Democratic Chairman Max Baucus, D-Montana, and Republican Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, have been working closely together on writing a bill. 
"I'm disappointed really that the House is going off on all of its tangents once again," Daschle said Friday.
"The capital gains cut apparently is alive and well over there and an array of other things that are just handouts to those who probably don't need it." 
The White House welcomed the House Republican stimulus bill, even though it is much larger than the $60 billion to $75 billion package that President Bush previously suggested. 
"The president is pleased that action is beginning in the House on a stimulus package," White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said Friday.
He added that the measure "includes many of the items that the president has proposed." 
Fleischer also said Bush "hopes that the end product will be a very bipartisan product.
He wants to work closely with the Democrats on this." 
CNN Congressional Correspondent Kate Snow contributed to this report.
For all of President Bush's promises to bring a new tone to the capital, it felt like the bad old days in Washington last week.
Democrats railed about the "shameful subversion of the process" as Republican leaders muscled the largest chunk of Bush's tax cut through the House with virtually no Democratic influence or support.
The education bill everyone says he or she wants limped out of a Senate committee, but only after Republicans blocked Democrats from adding money for school repair and Democrats blocked money for vouchers.
As a favor to business interests, Republicans in both houses rolled back Clinton Administration regulations meant to curb repetitive-motion injuries in the workplace.
And Bush continued his tough-love approach to bipartisanship, wooing vulnerable Democrats on taxes by flying to their home states and threatening their political survival. "
Hostage taking!"
fumed California Congresswoman Ellen Tauscher. 
So it was a kind of poetic justice that when the first serious obstacle to Bush's tax cut emerged, it came from the year's first act of true bipartisanship.
Five Senate Republicans and six Democrats--a potent bloc in the evenly divided Senate--announced they would support big tax cuts only if they include a "trigger" or "safety mechanism" that would prevent future rate reductions from kicking in if projected budget surpluses fail to materialize. 
By peddling an idea first raised by Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan--whose seal of approval is to economic policy what Good Housekeeping's is to home appliances--the centrist bloc instantly seized the fiscal high ground.
Bush insists that the surplus, projected to be $5.6 trillion over the next decade, can easily accommodate his $1.6 trillion tax cut.
But while government number crunchers are fairly accurate when predicting revenues over the next year or two, they are notoriously unreliable six or more years down the line, when more than two-thirds of the Bush cuts would take effect.
And if they were off by less than 2% of gdp five years from now, the surplus would be all but wiped out.
"It is imperative that we protect the surpluses," says Maine Republican Olympia Snowe, a trigger proponent who sits on the Finance and Budget committees. 
The White House rejects the idea, as it has rejected every challenge to the plan so far.
Even before the Senators put forward their proposal, Bush adviser Karl Rove told allies that any trigger "is dead on arrival with this President."
The Bushies argue that a tax cut without a guarantee would be useless in reviving the economy. "
These tax cuts are important because people plan investment and savings on them," says Nebraska Republican Chuck Hagel.
"If you're playing around with that, the uncertainty of that will withhold commitments of capital investments, which create productivity and jobs and tax revenues.
" Many Democrats aren't wild about triggers either--but for very different reasons.
"My preference is to reduce the size of the tax cut so triggers aren't necessary," says Senate minority leader Tom Daschle.
And both sides fear a centrist bill will provide political cover for pols too fainthearted to back Bush--or to stand with Daschle against the President. 
The real problem with triggers, though, is that there is no guarantee they will work.
When it's time for them to kick in, lawmakers sometimes use accounting gimmicks to get around them.
The most famous example is the 1985 Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act, which was passed at a time of surging deficits and required deep spending cuts to be enacted automatically if Congress failed to do the job.
"The first time we pulled the Gramm-Rudman trigger, it went off.
The second time we pulled it, it went off," former Senator Warren Rudman recalls ruefully. "
The third time we pulled it, it misfired, and by the fourth time, they took away the gun." 
At a minimum, the trigger proposal suggests the easy part is over for Bush.
His tax plan is far less likely to get through the Senate intact.
Democrats have begun to shake themselves out of their postelection Pardongate torpor; they're ready to rumble.
"This is the President presenting his tax proposal," says Indiana's Evan Bayh.
"This is not Moses coming down the mountain with tablets of stone."
Even some Republican leaders aren't singing in unison with Bush.
Finance Committee chairman Charles Grassley has predicted that the 10-year resolution his panel passes is likely to provide for tax cuts of "up to" Bush's $1.6 trillion, with smaller reductions in the estate tax and for the top income bracket than Bush proposes. 
Democratic Senators seemed more annoyed than intimidated that Bush kept sweeping into their states to argue for his tax plan.
Bush sees it as a variation on Ronald Reagan's strategy of going over the heads of Congress; Reagan's televised 1981 appeal for tax cuts flooded Capitol Hill with supportive phone calls and letters.
But a week after Bush's visit to Nebraska, aides to Democratic Senator Ben Nelson say, the response to Bush was unremarkable--far fewer calls and e-mails, in fact, than the office got in January during the battle over John Ashcroft's Attorney General nomination.
Daschle greeted Bush's arrival Thursday in South Dakota, Daschle's home state, with ads thanking him for the visit and urging him to work with Democrats for "real tax relief that's responsible and fair for everyone."
And Daschle taunted Bush for refusing to debate the question with him on the state's largest TV station. 
While Democrats were powerless to stop the tax bill in the House, Bush's unbending tactics there generated plenty of ill will.
His tax cut got only 10 House Democratic votes, compared with 48 for Reagan's, and some of the loudest opposition came from the most conservative Democrats--the "Blue Dogs" whom Bush aides had once considered potential allies.
By forcing the most fiscally conservative members of the party to accept a tax cut they consider too large and by doing it before he produced the details of his budget and spending cuts, Bush galvanized the Democrats "in a way Dick Gephardt could never do," says Democratic Senator John Breaux.
"That could spell serious problems for them on Medicare reform, education reform and other issues.
What they did certainly didn't change the culture.
It was just a repeat." 
As the going gets rough, Bush may be forced to make nice.
So far, though, it looks as if Washington is playing the same old game, with the same old score.
"Confrontation: 10," Daschle says.
"Bipartisanship: zero."
Boosted by a pledge from the U.S. government to provide more assistance, the U.N. refugee agency Wednesday was preparing emergency plans to aid a worsening Afghan refugee crisis. 
Following U.S. demands, Pakistan closed its borders with Afghanistan on Monday leaving tens of thousands of Afghans fleeing the country in fear of U.S. attacks behind closed gates. 
The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) says emergency meetings are underway in Pakistan to discuss how to deal with the situation. 
"Thousands of people in Afghanistan are already on the move, joining millions others who were displaced inside and outside the country even before the latest crisis," U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees Ruud Lubbers said Tuesday. 
"We must do everything we can to avoid further displacement of innocent civilians." 
Although the main border gates between Pakistan and Afghanistan have been closed, the 2,240 km (1,400-mile) long border is porous and has been used as smuggling route for centuries. 
On Wednesday, despite the border closure, an estimated 400 Afghan refugees crossed the border near the Pakistan city of Quetta. 
The UNHCR was sending 2,000 tents to the city, adding to the more than 9,300 tents currently in Pakistan -- enough for 50,000 people, the UNHCR says. 
UNHCR spokesman Kris Janowski said Tuesday residents were continuing to flee Afghanistan's cities and move to rural areas although the number has been decreasing. 
However, the swelling of refugees near the Pakistan borders is raising concerns of food shortages. 
U.N. officials said there is enough food in the areas concerned for two weeks but with more refugees arriving daily, the supply may dwindle rapidly. 
There were also reports of food shortages being felt in Kabul as residents purchase remaining stocks. 
On Monday, the UNHCR warned that the many Afghans attempting to flee the country in fear of possible U.S. attacks was exacerbating an already "catastrophic" humanitarian crisis. 
UNHCR spokesman Peter Kessler told CNN the focus on the refugee crisis in Afghanistan is the agency's top priority, saying the country was on a "humanitarian precipice". 
Many people inside Afghanistan, Kessler said, "are very much living on a hand to mouth basis.
" 
The UNHCR, which has offices in countries surrounding Afghanistan, has a large operation in Pakistan. 
The agency is in touch with the Taliban's representatives in Islamabad, Pakistan, and with neighboring countries about the growing crisis. 
Most aid workers, reporters and diplomats have already left Afghanistan for security reasons.
The World Food Program has ceased delivery of foodstuffs. 
Because of drought over the last few years and warfare for more than two decades, the Afghan refugee problem was huge even before the threat of U.S. attacks. 
Before last Tuesday, there had been 2 million Afghan refugees in Iran and another 2 million in Pakistan. 
There are though to be also another 1 million displaced persons in the country. 
has postponed the launch of a satellite designed to produce the first high-fidelity color movies of solar flares. 
The High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager spacecraft, or HESSI, was scheduled for launch on June 7 aboard a Pegasus rocket.
But a Pegasus rocket was used in the failed test flight of an experimental plane on Saturday at Edwards Air Force Base in California. 
Engineers are working to determine if there is any connection between the failure of the X43-A mission and the Pegasus vehicle that will be used to launch HESSI from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. 
now says HESSI will launch on or about June 12. 
The spacecraft has one instrument -- an imaging spectrometer that can create high quality movies of solar flares in X-rays and gamma rays.
Those images should help scientists better understand the sun. 
originally was scheduled to be launched last July, but the date was pushed back after the spacecraft was damaged during a vibration test on March 21, 2000.
A salvage barge has pulled into the waters of a Russian shipyard carrying under its hull the Kursk submarine and the remains of sailors killed when it exploded and sank last year. 
The Giant-4 barge was attached to floating anchors about 500 yards (metres) from shore at Roslyakovo near the northern port city Murmansk just after 5 p.m. (1300 GMT) on Wednesday, The Associated Press reported Russian Navy spokesman Vladimir Navrotsky as saying. 
He said it would take two or three days to prepare the ship for docking. 
"People concentrated all their efforts.
The situation was very tense as people felt high responsibility," Navrotsky told reporters. "
After anchoring we immediately will start detailed radiation checks.
" 
The barge was escorted by ships that were checking to ensure no leakage from Kursk's two nuclear reactors, which have been a constant cause of concern since the submarine sank in August 2000 during naval manoeuvres, killing its entire 118-man crew. 
Officials have said the reactors on the Kursk, one of Russia's most modern submarines, were safely shut down at the time. 
Deputy Prime Minister Ilya Klebanov, who is in charge of the Kursk salvage effort in the Russian Cabinet, insisted the 18,000-ton vessel's reactors would remain safe. 
"We are absolutely confident nothing will happen to the reactors," Klebanov, who oversaw the Kursk's lifting, told reporters on Tuesday. 
"If there had been one in a million chance that something would happen, we would never had carried out the operation in Roslyakovo." 
Once the Kursk is docked, officials will remove the remains of the crew to prevent damaging contact with the air.
Navrotsky said officials expected to find 30 or 40 bodies, because the others on board were probably atomised by the powerful explosions that sank the submarine. 
At least 23 Kursk sailors survived for several hours in the stern compartments, according to letters found when divers entered the vessel in November and recovered 12 bodies. 
At least 30 graves were dug at the Serafimov cemetery in St. Petersburg for the burial of the dead sailors.
Two sailors whose bodies were retrieved are buried in Serafimov. 
Despite the reassurances from officials, concern about a possible radiation leak has prompted Roslyakovo officials to work out evacuation plans and boost medical supply stores. 
Another worry was the Kursk's 22 Granit cruise missiles. "
Unloading missiles is dangerous even in normal conditions," Popov said.
"We are taking extra safety precautions." 
If it proves impossible to safely lift the missiles from their containers, the navy is prepared to cut them out of the Kursk's hull together with containers, Popov said. 
He did not say when the missiles would be removed, but estimated it would take at least a year to dismantle the submarine along with its nuclear reactors and missiles. 
It took the Dutch Mammoet-Smit International consortium 15 hours to lift the submarine, which was lying 356 feet below the surface, on steel cables lowered from the Giant 4 barge.
The operation cost the Russian government $65 million. 
The government said the Kursk must be raised to avoid any potential danger to the environment from its nuclear reactors and to shipping because of its position in shallow waters. 
The Russian navy also hopes to determine the cause of the disaster.
The favoured theory is that Kursk sank after a practice torpedo exploded, causing others to detonate and rip the submarine apart.
Rail and power workers in South Korea are extending their strike into a second day despite government threats to take stern measures against strike organizers.
On Monday helmeted riot police scuffled with union activists protesting some of the longest working hours in the world and a halt to the privatization of state utilities.
South Korean authorities have declared the strike illegal and say they are preparing to arrest its leaders, 36 of whom have taken refuge at a Roman Catholic church in central Seoul.
The government says Korean law bans strikes at public utilities.
As the standoff deepens thousands of riot police were deployed Tuesday morning at the campuses of Seoul National University and Konkuk University where an estimated 8,000 union activists are holding a sit-in.
Union officials have warned that 100,000 more workers will walk out Tuesday if labor laws aren't revised to meet their demands.
Workers at state-run Korea Gas ended their strike Monday, after agreeing a compromise with ministry officials giving unions a say on the timing and methods of the privatization process.
However, unions at several major Korean manufacturers, including Hyundai Motors, have threatened to join the walkout if demands are not met.
The militant Confederation of Trade Unions (KCTU), Korea's second largest union with some 500,000 members, said at least 100,000 workers would walk out at 1 p.m. local time unless labor laws are revised to ensure a five-day work week and flexible shifts.
Many South Koreans currently work a six-day week with long working hours.
Unions have said they fear mass layoffs will result from government plans to restructure debt-ridden state companies through privatization.
The sell-off of ineffective state firms is a key component of President Kim Dae-jung's economic reforms begun in the aftermath of the 1997-98 Asian economic crisis.
With the strike entering its second day those being hit hardest so far are commuters, facing lengthy delays with up to 50 percent of rail services cancelled.
A similar number of cancellations are expected Tuesday.
Freight services have also been hit with delays in the delivery of export cargo to South Korean ports.
However, the impact of protests by power workers has so far been limited because their facilities are mostly automated.
Manhattan's district attorney said Saturday he would move to dismiss some charges against firefighters stemming from fighting that broke out at a protest November 2 at the World Trade Center disaster site. 
Seventeen charges resulting from a melee between police and firefighters will be dropped, Manhattan District Attorney Robert Morgenthau said.
The district attorney said he was acting on a request from New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani. 
The firefighters were among hundreds rallying against the city's decision to scale back the number of police and firefighters working on Ground Zero recovery operations.
As police tried to hold them back, several fistfights broke out. 
Charges involving hitting a police police officer would stand, Morgenthau said.
Most of the charges to be dropped involved criminal trespassing, he said. 
Morgenthau said he agreed to take the action after Giuliani and the city's police and fire commissioners convinced him that those involved had been under tremendous stress since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. 
"We will dismiss them in the interest of justice and in the light of all the circumstances, the extraordinary heroism of the firemen, policemen, and tremendous emotional strain of everyone involved," Morgenthau said.
"I think that's the fairest disposition." 
The fight that occurred at Ground Zero was "unacceptable," but "we want to be able to put this behind us so that we can move ahead," Giuliani said. 
Fire Commissioner Thomas Von Essen said he appreciated the decision. 
"It's just so obvious to us, ...
the level of stress and strain on everybody," he said "There is an awful lot of irrational thinking and irrational behavior going on." 
Police Commissioner Bernard Kerik said he also had talked to the families of firefighters who were concerned about the arrests. 
"There is an extremely emotional circumstance behind all of this," Kerik said.
"We saw things at Ground Zero happen that have never happened before in this city."
The International Monetary Fund expressed support on Thursday for a revenue sharing agreement Argentina has reached with its provinces and said it was likely an IMF negotiating team would be sent to Buenos Aires next week.
spokesman Thomas Dawson said that the 183-nation lending agency had received a text of the agreement which was reached late Wednesday between Argentine President Eduardo Duhalde and governors of the country's provinces.
The accord, seen as crucial in dealing with Argentina's budget deficit, fixes the amount of money the provinces can receive from the central government at 56 percent of the total tax pool and commits the provincial governors to cutting their deficits by 60 percent this year.
Duhalde, in a signing ceremony in Buenos Aires, called the agreement an important first step to "put Argentina back on its feet."
In Washington, Dawson told reporters, "Certainly an agreement with the provinces on a sustainable relationship is something to be welcomed."
He said this agreement was one of a "number of areas" where progress was being made in discussions between IMF officials and the Argentine government on the proper approach to take to deal with the country's severe financial crisis.
"There is a lot of work to do but we are committed to work with the authorities as intensively as we and they can," Dawson said.
Duhalde has said that international support is crucial to his efforts to overcome the country's deep financial crisis.
His government is reportedly seeking as much as $23 billion in new loans.
In December, the IMF cut off Argentina's access to an existing $22 billion loan program, contending that the country's current economic policies were not sustainable.
That decision forced the country to default on its massive $141 billion foreign debt and triggered an economic crisis that led to violent street protests.
Dawson said that the IMF negotiating team will be led by Anoop Singh, who was named on Monday to a newly created IMF post of director of special operations.
Managing Director Horst Koehler said that he created the new post to have a top IMF official coordinate work among various IMF departments with countries facing "critical situations."
Copyright 2002
The Associated Press .
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
has again postponed the launch of a spacecraft designed to make movies of solar flares. 
There is no problem with the High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager, or HESSI, according to Susan Hendrix, a spokeswoman for the Goddard Space Flight Center.
But the launch has been delayed indefinitely because of ongoing concerns about the satellite's launch vehicle -- a Pegasus rocket. 
A similar Pegasus rocket is blamed for dooming the test flight earlier this month of NASA's X-43A, an experimental plane designed to attain speeds as high as Mach 10. 
Moments after the X-43A and its Pegasus booster rocket were released from the wing of a carrier aircraft, the combo went off course and was deliberately blown up.
The debris fell into the Pacific off the coast of California. 
The investigation into the test flight mishap still is in the works, so NASA is holding off on the $85 million HESSI mission, Hendrix told CNN.com on Tuesday. 
Instead, she said the spacecraft will be loaded onto the Stargazer, a modified Lockheed L-1011, and ferried from its Cape Canaveral, Florida, launch site to Vandenberg Air Force Base in California within the next few days to have its battery replaced. 
When HESSI is launched, the Stargazer will fly it out of Cape Canaveral Air Force Station to a height of about 39,000 feet over the Atlantic.
The spacecraft and its Pegasus rocket will be dropped from the plane and the Pegasus then will boost HESSI to a circular orbit 373 miles (600 kilometers) above the Earth. 
The satellite is equipped with an imaging spectrometer that can create X-ray and gamma ray movies of solar flares, which can disrupt communications and equipment on Earth.
HESSI has a new kind of X-ray vision that will create the first high-fidelity color movies of solar flares in their highest energy emissions, according to NASA. will join a team other solar observing satellites including SOHO, the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory; GOES, the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite; TRACE, the Transitional Regional and Coronal Explorer; and ACE, the Advanced Composition Explorer. 
The HESSI mission is expected to last two to three years. 
previously was set to launch last July but suffered damage during testing in March.
Bad weather is pushing back the timetable for raising the wreck of the Russian nuclear submarine Kursk. 
Rough seas have slowed down the progress of divers attaching cables to the Kursk from a barge that will be used to winch the submarine to the surface. 
The Dutch-led team had hoped the winching could begin this week but now it will not be possible to begin the operation until next week. 
And the divers are in a race against time with winter weather closing in on the Barents Sea where the Kursk sank. 
The Barents Sea storm season, which begins during October, could rule out further attempts to raise the submarine until after the winter. 
Bad weather and technical problems have already seen the first deadline -- September 15 -- for raising the submarine pass. 
Frans van Seumeren, president of the Mammoet company which is working to raise the Kursk with another Dutch company, Smit International, was quoted by The Associated Press as saying: "I think we must more think about the beginning of next week, or the weekend.
" 
The Kursk -- one of Russia most modern nuclear-powered submarines -- sank in August 2000, killing all 118 sailors on board, while on exercises in the Barents Sea. 
Divers have attached six of the 26 cables needed to raise hoist the Kursk to the surface. 
Russian officials have said the Kursk sank after a faulty torpedo set off a series of explosions last August -- but what caused the initial blast remains a mystery. 
Once it is raised, the Kursk's body will be transported to a dry dock, where experts are to examine the wreck for clues as to what caused Russia's worst naval disaster.
While the number of women going online is increasing in the Asia-Pacific region, efforts are still needed to promote greater Internet awareness, especially among housewives and the older generation, a panel of women technologists at a worldwide forum said. 
The Global Summit of Women, held in Hong Kong on Friday, touched on electronic commerce and digital divide issues that included education, government intervention, and available technologies that would help more women to get online.
"The Philippine government has set up telecenters where citizens in remote areas can use the Internet," said Cecile Reyes Philippine assistant secretary for information technology, Department of Transportation and Communications.
She said that there are some areas without even telephone service, so "going online" is a foreign concept. 
Telecenters, which were set up to create awareness and educate rural Filipinos on the Internet, are centers where phone, fax, and computers are available.
They are also equipped with learning tools, such as CD-ROMs, which can teach about the Internet and the simple use of computers, she said. 
Since most women in the Philippines stay home and tend to their families, they are inevitably left out of the technology loop for lack of exposure to it.
However, with new legislation, Reyes hopes that over time, things will change. 
A "10-to-1 ratio" telecommunications law in the Philippines dictates that for every 10 provinces in which telecommunications companies build infrastructure, they are required to equip one non-revenue generating area with basic telecommunications infrastructure, Reyes said. 
In Hong Kong, where Internet and mobile phone penetration rates are among the highest in the world, getting people online has not posed much of a problem.
However, housewives and the older generation remain a concern for the Hong Kong government, said Secretary for Hong Kong's Information Technology and Broadcasting Bureau, Carrie Yau.
"We've installed Cyber Points in libraries, post offices, and other public facilities so that those without computers at home will still have an opportunity to access the Internet," Yau said, adding that there is no room for complacency, even for a territory with high Internet penetration rates. "
The fundamentals (of our IT strategy) are to start from the homes and schools." 
According to Yau, Hong Kong is ahead in its Digital 21 plan, which aims to place Hong Kong as a leader in the e-commerce world.
"We are trying to get nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and other communities to bring IT awareness to the grassroots level," she said.
Similarly, Reyes said that the Philippines needs to put up strong knowledge development programs, starting with schools.
"The reality is that the students are more knowledgeable than the teachers (in IT)," she said, adding that the Philippines has half a million teachers, most of whom are women and not well-versed in the Internet.
On the enterprise level, Reyes said that many women from small- and medium-size enterprises face problems such as high cost of IT infrastructure in bringing their companies online.
She suggested that these companies should look to more cost-efficient methods of doing business online, such as using application service providers as a cheaper alternative. 
The Internet continues to play a critical role within the Philippine government, minimizing corruption and streamlining processes, said Reyes.
"E-procurement for the government is done over the Internet, and this allows bidders to participate in a very transparent bidding process," she said. 
Other issues discussed at the summit include making interfaces easier and more user-friendly, to include even the illiterate into the Internet fold.
"Installing hardware is only the first step," said Yau.
"There also needs to be training, and interesting applications for first-timers as an incentive for them to go online."
Chinese Foreign Minister Zhu Bangzao said on Tuesday the APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting, scheduled for October 20-21, would "show its concern over terrorism in a proper form." 
Zhu said as the host of APEC, Beijing was consulting with other countries on the format of the discussion. 
President Jiang Zemin will chair the Economic Leaders' Meeting, which will also be attended by President George W. Bush. 
At his regular briefing on Tuesday, Zhu reiterated Beijing's hopes that the global campaign against terrorism would be conducted under the auspices of the United Nations and its Security Council. 
The point about UN participation was also made during a telephone conversation on Tuesday between Chinese Premier Zhu Rongji and German counterpart Gerhard Schroeder. 
"Actions against terrorism should conform to the purpose and principles of the United Nations Charter and the acknowledged norms of international laws," Zhu said. 
And in his address to the UN General Assembly on Monday, China's representative Wang Yingfan said the UN should play an "important role" in counter-terrorism. 
"China will make its contribution to boosting international cooperation in the fight against terrorism" Chinese newspapers on Wednesday quoted Wang as saying. 
At the UN, Wang also made clear Beijing's opposition to Washington's deployment of a national missile defense (NMD) system. 
At the same time, the Chinese Foreign Ministry has called on Washington to lift the remaining sanctions on the country.
Most of these have to deal with the export of high technology to Chinese companies. 
Diplomatic analysts said Beijing was seeking to play a more prominent role in the global war against terrorism. 
Chinese officials have made clear their strong reservations about the imminent military action in Afghanistan by the U.S. and its allies. 
Beijing has also hinted that in return for its cooperation in the anti-terrorist effort, the U.S. should make concessions including the lifting of sanctions on China and a delay in the deployment of NMD.
"Unfortunately, it is a system where deficiencies exist.
Someone may undergo strict screening in Kansas City, while someone else can slip a pistol by the screeners in New Orleans, and this is intolerable," Mineta said. 
Mineta said flights will be held and passengers and luggage rescreened if secure areas are compromised or improper screening discovered. 
He said Transportation Department special agents will help monitor the screening efforts, and he has asked the Federal Aviation Administration to explore hiring more agents to help in the effort. 
Travelers can expect some inconveniences as surveillance and searches are intensified at airports, train stations and other locations, Mineta said. 
"The public, however, must also understand the need for patience," he said.
"That patience is the new form of patriotism." 
Security has been beefed up in the nation's airports since September 11 when hijackers managed to get box cutters past screening checkpoints. 
Lawmakers are debating legislation that would give the federal government greater control over airport security.
The Senate unanimously passed a bill that would put airport screeners on the federal payroll, but the White House and Republican leaders of the House of Representatives favor keeping them in the private sector.
Spanish police have arrested 11 suspected Islamic terrorists who police said were engaged in recruiting other terrorists and providing them with forged documents and other logistical support, a senior government official told CNN. 
Police said they belonged to the Muyaidin movement and were linked to suspected terrorist mastermind Osama bin Laden. 
The alleged leader of the group is a Syrian-born Spanish national, Imaz Edim Baraktiarkas.
The other nine are Tunisian or Algerian nationals. 
At a news conference with visiting Italian Prime Minister Sylvio Berlusconi Tuesday, Spanish Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar announced an "important operation" against Islamic terrorism. 
Interior Minister Mariano Rajoy soon after gave limited details of the roundup. 
In September, Spain arrested six Algerians it said were part of a similar logistics cell for Islamic terrorists. 
Investigators have been trying to determine what connection the six may have had to Mohammed Atta, who is thought to have piloted the first plane to hit New York's World Trade Center towers on September 11. 
Atta made two trips to Spain this year, in January and July, during which police believe he met with other terrorists. 
Atta reportedly met with at least one of the suspects, two Spanish television stations reported.
CNN has not confirmed those reports. 
Rajoy said the arrests in Madrid were the result of a two-year police investigation with assistance form other European police departments. 
Since September 11, police have revealed visits to Spain of other suspected Islamic terrorists who are currently in detention in Belgium and Italy on suspicion of plotting to attack American targets in western Europe. 
Last June, police arrested another suspected Islamic terrorist considered to be a bin Laden aide.
He was quickly deported to police custody in France.
Post offices and government buildings reopened Tuesday as the anthrax scare edged into cleanup mode.
But the threat of further contamination remained.
A diplomatic mailbag sent from Washington to the U.S. consulate in the Russian city of Yekaterinburg tested positive for what was described as a negligible amount of anthrax spores, consular officials said Tuesday.
The consulate's mail was tested after a State Department mail worker in Virginia was diagnosed with anthrax on Oct. 25.
"This has been one of the most difficult and sad times in postal history," Postmaster General John Potter said Tuesday.
There was good news Monday for Norma Wallace of Willingboro, N.J., a postal worker who went home from the hospital after a three-week bout with inhaled anthrax. 
"I have an obligation to explain that even though we have been confronted with a deadly disease, there is hope," she said. 
Wallace is the third inhaled anthrax victim to recover and leave the hospital; three others remain under hospital care. 
Four people have died of inhaled anthrax since the mail attacks began, including Kathy Nguyen, a New York woman with no apparent connection to the mail, the media or government, which have been the focus of the attacks.
The hospital where she worked, the Manhattan Eye, Ear and Throat Hospital, reopened Tuesday, six days after it was closed by the anthrax threat.
There have also been several cases of the less-severe skin form of the disease. 
In Rochester, Minn., researchers at the Mayo Clinic said Monday they may have a new, faster test for anthrax.
Current tests often have false positives and have to be confirmed by more detailed lab testing. 
The Mayo Clinic developed a DNA test that promises better results in 30 minutes, instead of days.
While test is still experimental, some laboratories plan to begin using it next week. 
In Lansing, Mich., the nation's only manufacturer of an anthrax vaccine said it expects it will be at least mid-December before it can win federal permission to ship it. 
BioPort Corp. has been unable to distribute the vaccine since it failed FDA inspections in 1999 and 2000.
The company submitted new documents for the FDA's approval last month. 
BioPort will start a new production cycle on Nov. 22, spokeswoman Kim Brennan Root said.
Inspectors from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration will visit in mid-December, she said.
At the Pentagon, officials said there was no indication that anthrax spores found in two postal boxes there had migrated to other parts of the military complex. 
The Defense Protective Service checked 150 spots in the Pentagon office, air ducts and air quality and found all of them to be negative, spokesman Richard L. McGraw said Tuesday. 
Kenneth Weaver, the chief postal inspector, told the Postal Board of Governors that his inspectors are screening the mail passing through selected postal facilities and are following up more than 300 leads received from the broadcast America's Most Wanted . 
The focus, he said, is tracking down whoever placed anthrax in the mail. 
Potter has estimated that the Postal Service could face increased costs and business losses totaling billions of dollars in the wake of the anthrax attacks. 
"Extraordinary expenditures will be required," said Robert Rider, chairman of the Postal Service Board of Governors.
"We strongly believe these costs should not be borne by our customers through increased rates." 
Postal chief financial officer Richard Strasser said the costs of adding security, dealing with the terrorists and lost business will total "billions of dollars." 
Strasser said the agency has already lost $800 million in reduced business in the eight weeks since Sept. 11.
He said it is working to cope with the costs of medical care for postal workers, testing and cleanup of facilities, extra costs for mail handling while the airlines were grounded and changes in postal facilities to increase the security of the mail. 
Washington's giant Brentwood postal facility was closed after anthrax was detected.
Contamination has been found in various locations throughout the federal government that received mail from Brentwood.
That prompted testing of government mail rooms nationwide. 
Most of the Longworth House office building reopened Monday, 10 days after closing in the anthrax threat.
The post office in Princeton, N.J., also reopened and the West Trenton office was to do so Tuesday. 
Still facing cleanup is the Hart Senate Office Building, where Sen. Tom Daschle's office is located.
A letter sent to that office tested positive for anthrax.
The plan had been to decontaminate the nine-story building with chlorine dioxide gas.
Scientists worried that variations in humidity, temperature or the gas itself might prevent uniform performance and it remained unclear how the building eventually will be cleaned.
Back in Washington, authorities were preparing to deal with the piles of mail held since the contamination was reported. 
The FBI said sealed containers of congressional mail that was stored in a Washington warehouse are being transferred to another facility in Virginia for inspection.
That mail has not been sanitized and thus is being handled as though it was contaminated. 
The agency took control of the mail after the Daschle letter was found.
It will likely take weeks to inspect and, if necessary, test the 280 55-gallon drums of now-sanitized mail, the agency said. 
The Postal Service, meanwhile, has a separate mass of mail addressed to government agencies from its Brentwood facility.
That, too, was sent to Ohio to be sanitized.
Postal inspectors will begin sorting through it within days. 
Investigators are looking for letters similar to those sent to Daschle and to news media in New York, hoping to find clues. 
"We are just as anxious to resolve this as the American public is, but we want to do this right," said postal inspector Lori Groen.
The Associated Press contributed to this report.
The Queen Mother Elizabeth, who died Saturday at the age of 101, held an unshakeable place in British affections for more than half a century.
Buckingham Palace said the widow of King George VI and mother of Queen Elizabeth II died at Royal Lodge, Windsor with the queen at her side.
The small, gray-haired figure of the Queen Mother, with her flowered hats and unfailing smile, was an enduring symbol of old-style royalty.
When respect for the younger royals plummeted during the 1990s and Britons wondered about the future of the monarchy, admiration for her only grew stronger.
Even when her dutiful and much-respected daughter, the queen, was criticized for not paying income taxes, not a word was uttered against her mother.
"In some ways, the Queen Mother is the most successful member of the royal family, the one that has, I think brilliantly, managed to combine what it is to be a member of a royal family in a democracy with what it is to be a member of a royal family which celebrates continuity," said former member of Parliament Baroness Williams in May 1993.
During the summer of 1995, the Queen Mother was at the heart of the country's 50th anniversary celebrations of the end of World War II, and attracted huge cheering crowds of all ages.
To the war generation, she personified the determination that saw them through the Blitz.
Their pride in their own fortitude during the war seemed to translate into pride in her.
The Queen Mother's decision at age 95 to take the risk of hip-replacement surgery was seen as just one more proof of her toughness and courage.
When she left the hospital, she waved aside proffered help and descended the steps on her own.
When her younger daughter, Princess Margaret, died Feb. 9 at age 71, the already ailing Queen Mother insisted on traveling from the royal estate at Sandringham to attend the funeral at Windsor.
"She performed to perfection the major function of royalty: that of causing people of all ranks to feel weak at the knees with excitement at being in its presence," historian Benjamin Pimlott wrote in 1997.
"She possessed an enviable capacity to make whomever she was talking to feel like the one person in the world she wanted to be with," he wrote.
Stories of the Queen Mother's charm, her warmth and vivacity, are innumerable.
And biographers determined to find some flaws in the "real woman" run up against a wall of privacy built by a loyal household and friends.
But one thing seems clear: Her personality and determination contributed greatly to the strength of the monarchy after World War II.
Without her, many doubt that her shy, stammering husband Albert could have managed when he was thrust unexpectedly onto the throne as King George VI by the abdication of his elder brother Edward VIII in 1936.
The respect and affection they won helped lift the shadow cast on the monarchy by a king who chose private happiness over public duty as the nation moved toward war.
And when her 56-year-old husband died of lung cancer in 1952, she became a steadfast support of her daughter, who took the throne as Queen Elizabeth II at the age of 25.
Instead of retiring like the dowager queens of the past, she took on a schedule of foreign tours and public appearances almost as busy as her daughter's, and continued at full tilt into her 90s.
To a small boy who asked whether she really was the queen's mother, she replied, "Yes, isn't it exciting?"
As the reign of Elizabeth II lengthened and the grandchildren grew, the "Queen Mum" was cast ? largely by the newspapers ?
in the role of a national granny.
Her fluffy pastel dresses, triple-strand pearl necklace and flowered hats, once the despair of fashion critics, contributed to the image, as did the annual birthday bouquets from a throng of children outside Clarence House, her London residence.
But for those old enough to remember the war, no image of the Queen Mother will replace the memory of her at her husband's side, tramping around the working-class East End of London, encouraging people who faced nightly German firebomb raids.
When invasion seemed imminent and bombs pounded cities around the country, she rejected Winston Churchill's advice that the family take refuge in Canada.
"The children could not go without me, and I could not possibly leave the king," who would never go, she said.
Instead, she practiced with a .303 rifle in the palace grounds.
When the bombs finally hit Buckingham Palace, she said, "I'm glad we've been bombed.
It makes me feel I can look the East End in the face."
In response to a suggestion that dark clothing would be more appropriate than her usual pastels and high heels for a bombsite tour, she said, "They would wear their best dresses if they were coming to see me."
Elizabeth Angela Marguerite Bowes Lyon, ninth of 10 children of the 14th Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne, was born in London on Aug. 4, 1900, and grew up at the family homes in St. Paul's Waldenbury in Hertfordshire, England, and Glamis Castle, Scotland.
In the rolling Scottish lowlands, Lady Elizabeth acquired a love of country life, dogs and horses.
She later became a trackside regular with a sharp eye for horseflesh and a string of thoroughbreds that made her one of the most successful horse breeders in Britain.
She was educated at home by governesses in a close-knit family atmosphere that she recreated in her own marriage.
During World War I, Glamis Castle became a convalescent home for the wounded, and Elizabeth wrote letters for the patients and served meals.
When the war ended, she was a very pretty 18; small, dark-haired and lively, with striking blue eyes and no shortage of suitors.
One was Prince Albert ? known as Bertie ?
the Duke of York, second of four sons of King George V and Queen Mary.
After a courtship of more than two years, and two rejected proposals, they were married in Westminster Abbey on April 26, 1923.
They lived a quiet home life with their daughters Elizabeth, born in 1926, and Margaret Rose, born in 1930.
Home was a sanctuary to Albert, who had grown up afraid of his father, distant from his mother, temperamental and afflicted with a stammer.
With his wife, he consulted speech therapists and did breathing exercises.
His father died Jan. 20, 1936 and his brother succeeded as King Edward VIII.
Within a year, the new king gave up the throne to marry American divorcee Wallis Warfield Simpson.
To Albert's dismay ?
he later said he "broke down and sobbed like a child" in front of Queen Mary ?
he was proclaimed king on Dec. 11, 1936.
His wife became the first British-born royal consort since Tudor times.
Edward married Mrs. Simpson and became Duke of Windsor.
The new queen, according to most biographers, found it hard to forgive the duchess and believed the stress of reigning shortened the king's life.
But at the duke's funeral at Windsor Castle in June 1972, in an apparent gesture of reconciliation and sympathy, the Queen Mother took the duchess by the arm.
Among the hints of the Queen Mother's not-quite-saintly qualities were fondness for a drink and a bet on the horses ?
both shared by millions of her fellow countrymen and women.
She was said to spend more freely than was wise.
Writer Penelope Mortimer created a stir with her 1986 biography, in which she indicated the Queen Mother loved being the center of attention, could be unforgiving even to members of her family, and was something of a flirt.
"Behind the apparent simplicity has been a deep understanding of human nature; behind the chattering, a sense of mission to communicate; within the sweet heart a steely resolution, and inside the little round face a square-set determination to do her duty."
The State Department prepared to pick through three weeks' worth of unopened mail, searching for an anthrax-tainted letter they believe passed through the department's mail center but has yet to be discovered. 
It wasn't clear why that search had not yet begun, given that health officials long have suspected that an undiscovered letter was almost certainly to blame for a State Department mail handler becoming infected with the inhalation anthrax.
This rare and dangerous form of the disease requires contact with a substantial number of spores. 
State Department officials said Tuesday that they became convinced that such a letter passed through their Sterling, Va., mail facility after anthrax was found in eight spots there. 
"We have to assume that, one, there is a contaminated letter of some kind in our system, and second of all, that we will eventually find it in one of these mail rooms or pouch bags," State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said Tuesday. 
For its part, the FBI said it didn't press for a quicker search because it doubts that a letter will be found, an assumption disputed by both the State Department and the CDC. 
Two weeks ago, the FBI came under fire from House lawmakers who questioned why it took the bureau so long to begin sorting through unopened congressional mail.
In that case, the issue was whether regular mail had been contaminated by touching an anthrax-filled letter addressed to Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle. 
On Tuesday, the last of six people to survive inhalation anthrax came home after 25 days in a suburban Washington hospital.
Leroy Richmond, a postal worker at the city's contaminated central facility, said he was grateful to doctors who began treating him for anthrax even before it was confirmed. 
At the State Department mail facility, testing found anthrax in eight spots, including six on a single automated mail sorter.
That suggests that a letter containing a substantial amount of anthrax passed through it, Boucher said Tuesday. 
The other possibility is that State Department mail touched the anthrax-filled letter sent to Daschle and became contaminated.
But health officials have said it's unlikely that cross-contamination would involve enough airborne spores to give a mail handler inhalation anthrax. 
Boucher said the department now was planning to examine undelivered mail in Washington and in embassies around the world that passed through the Sterling facility.
That mail has been held since Oct. 24, when the mail handler was diagnosed with anthrax. 
It was unclear why the State Department waited for results from environmental testing to begin looking for the letter and why the FBI hasn't been more eager to find it. 
Dr. Cedric Dumont, the State Department's medical director, said his department felt no urgency from the CDC or the FBI to move more quickly, so the department took its time, not testing the mail sorting machines until last week. 
"It just was not the highest priority," he said. 
Dumont said CDC officials were reluctant to conclude that another letter was lurking in the system until the machines were tested.
CDC officials, however, downplayed the test results, saying they simply bolster their established theory. 
At the FBI, a spokesman said investigators had not searched through the mail earlier because investigators officials believed that, if there was another letter, it had been delivered already. 
But Dumont said there was no reason to believe that.
And Boucher said that if the letter already had been delivered, someone presumably would have opened it and noticed the powder or gotten sick. 
"We have to assume that we stopped it, we stuck it in our system where all the mail is sealed," he said.
"We have to presume that we will be able to find whatever it is as we go through the mail in our system."
TASHKENT, Uzbekistan Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld paid a quick visit to Tajikistan on Saturday but said he reached no deals on military cooperation with the country, which shares a long border with Afghanistan. 
Rumsfeld then went on to Uzbekistan, where he was greeted at the airport in the capital, Tashkent, by Foreign Minister Abdulaziz Kamilov. 
While Tajikistan has shown reluctance to play host to U.S. troops, Uzbekistan has provided a base for an estimated 1,000 U.S. soldiers.
It was Rumsfeld's second visit to Uzbekistan in just a month, coming amid media reports that Washington wants to persuade Uzbekistan to provide more bases for the U.S.-led military campaign in neighoring Afghanistan. 
In the Tajik capital of Dushanbe, Rumsfeld said after an hourlong meeting with President Emomali Rakhmonov and several top officials that the sides would form an "assessment team" to look into ways in which Tajikistan could assist in the U.S.-led campaign. 
When asked by reporters whether there was a deal on military cooperation with Tajikistan, Rumsfeld said "No." 
Tajikistan backs the U.S. operation, initiated after Afghanistan's ruling Taliban militia refused to give up suspected terrorist mastermind Usama bin Laden.
But the impoverished republic has stopped short of offering bases and has permitted the use of its air space only for planes carrying U.S. aid. 
Rumsfeld said Tajikistan had been used in the military operation only for overflights.
He also said the country had assisted in intelligence-gathering. 
Tajik Foreign Minister Talbak Nazarov said assistance could be expanded to allow overflights of military planes or the use of Tajikistan's air fields. 
"The experts should look at what Tajikistan can offer America and what it cannot," said Nazarov.
He indicated that Washington could make use of the southern Tajik airport in Kulyab, about 60 miles from the Afghan border. 
"First we have to look at the state of the Kulyab airport," Nazarov said. 
Tajikistan and Afghanistan share a 750-mile border, which is jointly guarded by Tajik and Russian guards.
Russia also has a motorized rifle division stationed in Tajikistan, long a key corridor for smuggled weapons and drugs from Afghanistan. 
Nazarov suggested that Tajikistan's vulnerability was a key reason it did not offer bases earlier, as neighboring Uzbekistan did. 
"For a long time, we could not decide whether to participate in the military operation because we were worried about Tajikistan's security," he told reporters. "
But it is dependent on the outcome of the military anti-terrorist operation." 
Rumsfeld came to Tajikistan from Moscow, where he conferred with Russian President Vladimir Putin and Defense Minister Sergei Ivanov on possible cuts in strategic arms and U.S. plans to build a new missile shield. 
The backing of ex-Soviet Central Asian countries is seen as vital for the success of the U.S. operation in Afghanistan.
These nations are also important for sending humanitarian aid to refugees in Afghanistan. 
The five former Soviet republics in Central Asia, which also include Kazakstan, Kyrgyzstan and Turkmenistan, are all mainly Muslim and have been worried that the influence of the Taliban in nearby Afghanistan could reach their countries. 
Government troops in Uzbekistan, Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan have clashed sporadically with Islamic militants.
Okla. Phillips Petroleum Co. and Conoco Inc. are merging in a $35 billion deal that will create the nation's third largest integrated oil company, the companies announced Sunday. 
The merger would create a corporation with more than $60 billion in assets.
The deal, expected to close during the second half of 2002, is subject to regulatory and shareholder approval. 
The new company will also assume $18.6 billion in debt and preferred securities. 
The combined company, to be called ConocoPhillips, would be based in Houston, home to Conoco.
It would keep a reduced presence in Bartlesville, where Phillips employs 2,400 at its headquarters and research facility. 
"This is really a growth story for Conoco and Phillips," said Conoco Chairman Archie W. Dunham, who is delaying a planned retirement to serve as chairman of the combined company.
"We think this is the best way to create long term and short term value for our shareholders." 
Phillips Chairman James Mulva will be chief executive officer and president of the new company and become chairman when Dunham retires in 2004. 
"What we saw was just an ideal time for us to put our growth plans together," Mulva said. 
ConocoPhillips would be the nation's third-biggest oil and gas company in terms of production and the fifth-largest refiner in the world.
The two have combined employment of 58,000 worldwide and expect to save at least $750 million a year by merging. 
Mulva said most of the savings should come from realized operating efficiencies instead of job cuts.
Workforce reductions are planned in Bartlesville, he said. 
Under the terms of the deal, Phillips shareholders will get one share of each of ConocoPhillips stock for each Phillips share they own.
Conoco shareholders will get .4677
shares of the new stock. 
Phillips shareholders will end up with a 56.6-percent stake in the company, despite the fact that both companies characterized the merger as one of equals. 
The merger should result cost savings in refining, marketing and transportation and more capital to fund worldwide exploration and production, the two men said during a teleconference. 
Merger talks began in earnest about six weeks ago, Dunham said.
Both have been rumored merger candidates for years. 
Phillips is a familiar face to motorists in the United States with its Phillips 66 logo.
The company has more than 5 billion barrels of oil in reserve. 
Last year it merged its gas gathering and processing operations with Duke Energy and combined its chemicals division with ChevronTexaco. 
Phillips bought Tosco earlier this year, giving the combined company the capacity to produce more than 1.7 million barrels of oil a day. 
Phillips sells gasoline at more than 12,000 locations under the Phillips 66, Circle K and 76 brands. 
Houston-based Conoco has oil and gas exploration activities in 20 nations and has 3.7 billion barrels of oil in reserve.
Earlier this year, it acquired Gulf Canada Resources. 
The company also operates nearly 6,000 miles of pipelines nationwide and has stakes in nine refineries in the United States, Europe and Asia.
It operates more than 7,000 gas stations in Europe, Thailand and the United States. 
The deal comes on the heels of several big energy mergers.
In September, the Federal Trade Commission approved Chevron Corp.'s acquisition of Texaco Inc.
Other deals include BP Amoco's takeover of Atlantic Richfield Corp. in 1999 and Exxon Corp.'s acquisition of Mobil Corp., as the world's largest oil companies look for size and breadth to gain a competitive edge.
BELFAST, Northern Ireland
A handful of neutral politicians agreed, under British pressure Saturday, to join the Protestant voting bloc in Northern Ireland's legislature, a last-ditch deal designed to outmaneuver hard-line lawmakers and save the province's unity government. 
The decision by the Alliance Party, which represents both moderate Catholics and Protestants, freed the way for Britain to schedule another legislative vote, possibly Monday ?
just three days after Protestant extremists prevented David Trimble's re-election as the government's senior minister. 
The longtime absence of a "first minister" has pushed the power-sharing government, the hardest-won achievement of the 1998 Good Friday peace agreement, to the brink of collapse. 
With Alliance's reluctant entry into the Protestant camp, a second-round victory by Trimble appeared likely and hopes grew that the four-party coalition would survive. 
The major hard-line Protestant party, Ian Paisley's Democratic Unionists, protested that Britain was behaving illegally and that Monday's scheduled vote would be invalid. 
Democratic Unionist leaders vowed to file a lawsuit against Britain.
They demanded all sides respect Friday's vote, when Trimble received unanimous support from Catholic and neutral politicians ?
but lost because of a 30-29 split on the Protestant benches. 
Electing a leader requires majority support from Catholic and Protestant camps, while the neutrals' votes carry no influence. 
Alliance had maintained independence from the Irish Catholic and British Protestant camps in Northern Ireland's 108-seat legislature since its creation in 1998, two months after the peace pact. 
But Alliance leader David Ford agreed Saturday to allow some of his party's five lawmakers to join the Protestant benches when the legislature reconvenes Monday. 
Trimble, who resigned in July in protest at the Irish Republican Army's refusal to disarm, sought re-election after the IRA's decision last week to begin getting rid of weapons.
But many Protestants sought to block Trimble anyway ?
the only means, they calculated, to wreck a coalition that to their dismay includes the IRA-linked Sinn Fein party. 
Democratic Unionist lawmaker Nigel Dodds, who is also a Cabinet minister, said government rules made Saturday the last day possible for Trimble's re-election.
He said Britain was obliged to dissolve the legislature and call a new election. 
"Rather than going for fresh elections, which are now required, they are trying to rig the system and find some way of getting David Trimble back into government by the back door," said Dodds, whose uncompromising party expects to gain at Trimble's expense in any future Northern Ireland-wide election.
Britain, which retains ultimate responsibility for governing Northern Ireland, has twice forestalled the administration's collapse in recent months by stripping it of power, then quickly restoring it. 
These one-day suspensions of power had served to delay the deadline for re-electing Trimble, most recently to Saturday, and allowed the remaining 10 Cabinet ministers to run government departments. 
Trimble's defeat Friday demonstrated that despite the IRA's disarmament move, Paisley retained a voting bloc strong enough to create a government gridlock indefinitely. 
A further temporary suspension of powers, creating a new deadline of Dec. 14 for a successful Trimble re-election bid, wouldn't have changed that balance of power. 
So Britain instead spent Saturday seeking Alliance's transfer to the Protestant fold.
Had Alliance not complied, Britain was also pursuing the possibility of rewriting voting rules to lower the hurdle of Protestant consent to just 40 percent rather than the current majority requirement.
Qatar Trade ministers from almost all the World Trade Organization's 142 members formally approved China's membership on Saturday with a unanimous, if fully predetermined, vote.
China will "abide by WTO rules and honor its commitments while enjoying its rights," Chinese Trade Minister Shi Guangsheng said.
China's entry into the WTO marks a turn away from the communist country's former isolationist policies and brings the country's 1.2 billion citizens into the global marketplace.
Admission into the WTO did not come easily for China.
The country first applied for membership in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the WTO's predecessor, in 1986.
In the 15 years since, China has been changing local and national laws to comply with the requirements of WTO membership.
One of the most contentious points was resolved only 18 months ago; the admission of Taiwan, which will occur on Sunday.
Beijing considers Taiwan to be a breakaway province that left after a 1949 civil war. 
Taiwan will be admitted as a separate customs territory ?
not as a separate country.
Its admission to the WTO will occur tomorrow because of a 1992 understanding between China and Taiwan that the former country would be admitted first. 
China's admission means that it will have to open its markets to goods from other WTO members, but also that it will be able to export to WTO members ?
a fact that makes its neighbors nervous.
China will become a full member of the WTO 30 days after its parliament ratifies the agreement.
That move could come as early as Sunday.
Other than the vote on China's admission, however, there was little cooperation to be seen at the meeting, with several nations taking potentially inconsistent positions on a key patent protection issue.
Developing countries, led by Brazil and India, are pushing for a declaration that would say nothing in the WTO's rules would prevent them from taking action to protect public health.
The U.S., Switzerland, Japan and Canada oppose the resolution, saying the effect would be to allow any country to ignore patent protection on medicines. 
"This open-ended language would lead to mass erosion of patent protections ? from pharmaceuticals to medical software ? and thwart research into medicines that can save lives," U.S. Trade Representative Robert Zoellick said earlier.
Another issue pushed by developing nations was new language on so-called anti-dumping rules, which allow industrial nations to block goods imported at below-market price, usually due to subsidies. 
While the U.S. was willing to discuss such changes, Zoellick said, the country's position is that "any possible work in this area discipline the unfair trade practices themselves, not just the rules for countering them." 
Agricultural subsidies proved to be a contentious issue once again.
The EU's 15 nations are pushing for the right to use agricultural subsidies to promote rural development and environmental protection.
Jim Sutton, New Zealand's agriculture minister, said everyone supports such goals as protecting the environment and aiding rural communities. 
But, he added, "If they wish to have their fence posts painted white and their hedgerows trimmed, for goodness sake subsidize the trimming of hedges and the painting of fence posts.
Don't subsidize the farm production and hope that some of the money will be spent on paint." 
The Associated Press contributed to this report.
U.N. hopes for speedy action to install a broad-based government in Afghanistan are on hold because the victorious northern alliance doesn't appear to be in any hurry to share power. 
In just over a week, alliance forces that controlled a tiny part of northern Afghanistan swept south as Taliban fighters fled to escape punishing U.S. airstrikes.
Suddenly, two-thirds of Afghanistan is in alliance hands, including the capital, Kabul, and warlords from the various alliance factions are filling the power vacuum. 
"It's all happened quicker than we thought," Britain's U.N. ambassador, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, told British Broadcasting Corp. radio Saturday.
"We didn't realize the Taliban were such a house of cards." 
Former president Burhanuddin Rabbani, whose faction dominates the alliance toppled by the Taliban in 1996, returned to Kabul on Saturday, appearing to further entrench the alliance's hold on the country. 
This wasn't part of the U.S. or the U.N. game plan. 
On Saturday, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan strongly reiterated the need for a government that includes a wide range of Afghan parties. 
"If they do not do that, and one group tries to control power and assert itself, it is going to be a problem down the line.
And I would hope that Mr. Rabbani also is aware of this happening since he knows intimately the history of his own country," Annan said during a visit to Ottawa. 
The United States had gotten a promise from the northern alliance not to take Kabul so the United Nations could quickly arrange a meeting of Afghanistan's disparate ethnic groups and put together a broad-based government to run the country. 
But with the alliance savoring its newfound power, the prospect of a truly representative government has become more uncertain. 
A White House official said Saturday that the United States has been pressuring the northern alliance ? largely made up of ethnic minorities ?
to share power and to let the U.N. oversee assembly of the new government.
Several U.S. officials are in the region and in direct contact with the northern alliance, including James Dobbins, the special envoy for Central Asia. 
The official, speaking on condition he not be identified, reiterated that the administration does not want to force a government on Afghans.
But the new government must represent the country's diverse ethnic and political factions, the official said. 
The top U.N. envoy for Afghanistan, Lakhdar Brahimi, has outlined plans for a two-year transitional government backed by a multinational security force.
He is trying to organize a meeting of Afghanistan's many ethnic and tribal groups to decide their own future ?
hopefully sometime next week. 
The United Nations wants it held on "neutral" turf outside Afghanistan.
But after the capture of Kabul, the alliance's foreign minister, Abdullah, invited all Afghan factions except the Taliban to come to the capital to debate the new government. 
The United States is urging the alliance to commit to the meeting and to compromise on its demand that it be held in Kabul, a U.S. official said in Washington on condition of anonymity.
Brahimi's deputy, Francesc Vendrell, arrived in Kabul on Saturday to try to persuade alliance officials. 
"It's an extraordinarily difficult situation in which the U.S. and its allies are not in a position to exert control, or even significant influence, over their local allies on the ground whose military victory they smoothed the path for," said former Canadian ambassador David Malone, president of the International Peace Academy, a New York think tank. 
Col. Bob Stewart, who was commander of the British U.N. forces in central Bosnia during the Balkans conflict, said the United Nations was moving too slowly. 
"Fundamentally, the United Nations should have moved much faster and got people on the ground there," he told BBC. 
Greenstock said he didn't think the criticism was fair. 
"You can't just move in behind a load of warlords and start taking over a capital city belonging to another country," he said on the radio program.
"It all has to be done with legitimacy, with the support of the Security Council, and these things take a few days to organize." 
At a closed-door meeting Friday with the "Group of 21" countries that has been seeking peace in Afghanistan, diplomats quoted Brahimi as saying: "Don't tell me speed is of the essence.
Tell the factions.
And use your influence to get them to the meeting and back off from Kabul." 
Ravan Farhadi, an envoy for Rabbani's government, which is still recognized by the United Nations, told the General Assembly the alliance had no intention of monopolizing power. 
"All ethnic groups must be equally represented and given a voice," he said Wednesday. 
But diplomats say Farhadi has little clout with alliance military forces.
And if the northern alliance fails to keep its envoy's promise, it risks "losing the international recognition that the Rabbani government tenuously enjoys at the United Nations," Malone said. 
No multinational force has been drawn up yet, but a host of countries have pledged troops.
Along with U.S. forces already on the ground, the foreign troops could pressure the northern alliance forces to share power. 
Brahimi said Friday that "we will go only as fast as the Afghans are willing to go."
But, he said, "the more time is wasted, more problems may crop up and make progress that much more difficult."
A fresh horror emerged from the ruins of post-Taliban Kabul yesterday with the discovery of Al Qaeda plans for manufacturing the biological poison ricin. 
Instructions for preparing the poison were found by The Times amid dummy bombs and propaganda documents littering the cellar of an abandoned house once used as a terrorist training center. 
Ricin is one of the most toxic biological agents and was notoriously used by the Bulgarian secret police when they killed Georgi Markov by stabbing him with a poison umbrella as he crossed Waterloo Bridge in 1978. 
The documents uncovered in the Al Qaeda safe house reinforce the point, saying: "A dose equal to seven seeds will kill a child."
The papers also spell out the agonies that a victim will go through before death, which follows within a fortnight of administration. 
The Pentagon is already investigating the newspaper?s discovery of Al Qaeda?s plans for nuclear devices.
Tom Ridge, America?s Director of Homeland Security, said that while they did not prove that bin Laden had managed to build nuclear devices, the documents were "certainly consistent with his statements that he would like to acquire that capacity."
Donald Rumsfeld, the Defense Secretary, said of the Times report: "We saw it, we are checking it."
General Tommy Franks, the commander of the US campaign in Afghanistan, said that US Intelligence had drawn up a list of potential Al Qaeda weapons sites.
"Now we are about the business of checking those sites out, as they fall under our control." 
The search was given added urgency after Mullah Muhammad Omar, the Taliban leader, issued a chilling threat of reprisal against American targets.
He told the BBC World Service from Kandahar: "You, the BBC, and American public radios have created a sense of concern but the current situation of Afghanistan is related to a big cause ?
that is the destruction of America. 
"The plan is going ahead and, God willing, it is being implemented, but it is a huge task that is beyond the comprehension of human beings.
If God's help is with us this will happen within a short period of time. 
"Keep in mind this prediction.
The real matter is the extinction of America."
The gated Al Qaeda house in Saraq Panza, Kabul, had been looted after the Taliban fled, and the two Arab doctors who worked there were beaten and killed as they tried to escape on Monday night. 
The Times found ampules, syringes and pills scattered by looters across the ground floor, but the instructions for making ricin were concealed amid a mass of scattered documents listing formulae for manufacturing explosives, fuses and detonation circuits. 
The instructions make chilling reading. "
A certain amount, equal to a strong dose, will be able to kill an adult, and a dose equal to seven seeds will kill a child," one page reads. 
Another page says: "Gloves and face mask are essential for the preparation of ricin.
Period of death varies from 3-5 days minimum, 4-14 days maximum." 
The instructions listed the symptoms of ricin as vomiting, stomach cramps, extreme thirst, bloody diarrhea, throat irritation, respiratory collapse and death. 
Originally manufactured in Russia, ricin was used by British scientists to develop a "W bomb" during the Second World War, but it was never used.
It was also found by U.N. weapons inspectors in Iraq in the 1990s.
British and American special forces have narrowed their search for Usama bin Laden to a hilly area of just 30 square miles in southeastern Afghanistan, defence sources revealed Saturday. 
British SAS and American troops have been dropped by helicopter across the southern approaches to the area, near the Taliban-held city of Kandahar, to prevent bin Laden from escaping into Pakistan. 
As the manhunt triggered by the September 11 terrorist attacks on America intensifies, British soldiers have been involved in firefights with enemy forces around Kandahar. 
"The plan has always been to deny bin Laden space," said British Defense Secretary Geoff Hoon.
"The space he has to operate in is now very limited indeed." 
The disclosure reflected a growing confidence in intelligence circles that they would find bin Laden soon. 
A British defense intelligence source said bin Laden was believed to be "static" somewhere to the southeast of Kandahar. 
"For a variety of reasons we can be confident that he has not been able to move far," the source said. 
Last night the Taliban envoy to Pakistan refuted claims that bin Laden had left the country with his wives and children. 
"Usama is inside Afghanistan, but I don't know whether he is in our territory or the area controlled by the Northern Alliance," said Mullah Abdul Salam Zaeef. 
Donald Rumsfeld, the U.S. defense secretary, has warned that bin Laden might have access to a helicopter that could try to leave Afghanistan for a possible rendezvous with a private jet in Pakistan.
However, America has imposed what it calls a "total picture" over the region, meaning that a mixture of satellite, spy-plane and special-forces cover should enable it to trace any movement on the ground. 
The special forces arrived near Kandahar 10 days ago to block off escape routes and engage the enemy.
"It has been about aggression and surprise," said one source.
"We want to send a clear message that there is no safe way out to the rear of the Kandahar position." 
troops have been operating observation posts in the hills and running search-and-destroy patrols.
While they had killed a small number of enemy troops, the psychological impact of their presence had been "disproportionately significant", the source said. 
Refugees fleeing skirmishes around Kandahar spoke of British and American special forces searching for bin Laden in the mountains.
One refugee said he had seen a British man questioning a Taliban deserter.
Other Afghans crossing into Pakistan at Chaman said soldiers of western appearance were near the outskirts of Kandahar, a base for bin Laden's Al Qaeda organization as well as its Taliban hosts. 
Taliban and Al Qaeda forces appeared yesterday to be preparing for last stands in the two cities still in their hands ?
Kandahar in the south and Kunduz in the north.
At Kandahar, tribal leaders opposed to the regime agreed to allow Taliban forces to leave the city but said thousands of Arabs, Chechens and Pakistani supporters of bin Laden were staying to fight. 
Thousands more were standing their ground in Kunduz in the face of a Northern Alliance offensive expected today.
They threatened to massacre civilians if the alliance attacked. 
British Special Boat Squadron troopers were carrying out reconnaissance at the Bagram airfield north of Kabul to establish what repairs would be needed before it could be used as a forward command base. 
Military planners want to fly 4,000 troops, including marines and paratroopers, into Bagram and the northern city of Mazar-e-Sharif.
They would establish a 2-kilometer security cordon around both and would protect aid convoys travelling between the two cities against attack. 
The plans were thrown into confusion yesterday, however, when alliance commanders suggested that no more coalition troops would be welcome in the country. 
Jack Straw, the British foreign secretary, telephoned Dr Abdullah Abdullah, his alliance counterpart, who said last night: "If you are talking about the presence of thousands of fighting troops from outside Afghanistan, this is a major issue which has to be discussed.
The events of the past few days showed that the forces which were capable of doing the job on the ground were the forces of the alliance ." 
One minister confirmed there were now doubts over the plans for large numbers of British troops.
However, Hoon insisted the problem would be resolved.
Tony Blair is growing increasingly frustrated with the administration of President George W. Bush for not pursuing diplomatic and humanitarian initiatives more vigorously. 
A cabinet minister said: "The Americans are interested only in trying to get bin Laden and push the Taliban further back.
Tony's view is that now is the moment to get in there, both in terms of humanitarian aid and the diplomatic front."
Suspected terror mastermind Usama bin Laden is trying to acquire nuclear weapons, President Bush said Tuesday, confirming what many have fearfully speculated about since Sept. 11.
"These terrorist groups seek to destabilize entire nations and regions.
They're seeking chemical, biological and nuclear weapons.
Given the means, our enemies would be a threat to every nation; and, eventually, to civilization itself," Bush said via satellite broadcast to a 20-nation gathering of Eastern European leaders.
Later, the president said he was making that charge using bin Laden's own assertion from a couple of years ago that it was his religious duty to acquire weapons of mass destruction.
Officials said they have no evidence bin Laden already has such weapons, but the president said he wouldn't wait for the authors of mass murder to obtain weapons of mass destruction.
The president also reiterated his call for other countries to support the war.
"No nation can be neutral in this conflict, because no civilized nation can be secure in a world threatened by terror," Bush said. 
Previewing his weekend speech to the Warsaw Conference on Terrorism, Bush said he was putting "every nation on notice" that their support for ending terrorism must "involve more than sympathy or words."
"Our enemies have brought only misery and terror to the people of Afghanistan.
And now they are trying to export that terror throughout the world.
Al Qaeda operates in more than 60 nations, including some in Central and Eastern Europe," Bush said. 
He issued a long indictment of the Taliban regime and its terrorist allies: They kill, then rejoice over the murders; steal food from their own people; destroy religious monuments; forbid children to fly kites, sing songs or build snowmen.
A girl of 7, Bush said, can be beaten for wearing white shoes. 
Bush compared Afghanistan's Taliban regime and its "mad global ambitions" to the totalitarian regimes that enslaved Europe for much of the last century, and asked the region's new leaders to join his anti-terrorism campaign. 
Invoking the communist history that closed off freedoms to many of the nations assembled, Bush tip-toed around inciting allies who continue to have strong communist parties, like Russia and other former Soviet nations.
"For more than 50 years, the people of your region suffered under repressive ideologies that tried to trample human dignity.
Today our freedom is threatened once again," Bush said.
"Like the Fascist totalitarians before them, these terrorists ?
Al Qaeda, the Taliban regime that supports them and other terror groups across the world ?
try to impose their radical views through threats and violence." 
"We see the same intolerance of dissent, the same mad global ambitions, the same brutal determination to control every life and all of life.
We have seen the true nature of these terrorists in the nature of their attacks," Bush said. 
The Warsaw conference was assembled at the invitation of Polish President Aleksander Kwasniewski as part of a 10-day diplomatic offensive designed to address doubts about the military campaign in Afghanistan and discuss ways Eastern and Central European nations can cooperate in fighting terrorism. 
Heads of state from Albania, Bosnia, Croatia, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, Romania, Slovakia, Ukraine and Macedonia confirmed participation, said Andrzej Majkowski, a senior aide to Kwasniewski.
The Czech Republic, Slovenia and Yugoslavia planned to send senior government representatives, he said. 
Hungary also was expected to participate, but had not decided whom to send.
Observers were expected from Russia, Belarus, Turkey, the European Union, NATO and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. 
Bush avoided making promises of reciprocity for support in the war on terror.
Many of the nations in attendance are seeking entry into NATO.
His early morning address was given even before his weekly breakfast meeting with congressional leaders.
That meeting was expected to focus on reconciling House and Senate versions of an airline safety bill.
Bush was meeting later with French President Jacques Chirac and Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic.
Wednesday, Bush is scheduled to meet British Prime Minister Tony Blair.
Friday, he will meet Indian Prime Minister Atal Bahari Vajpayee.
The Associated Press contributed to this report .
Stocks soared Tuesday, with the broad market hitting levels unseen since late August as investors scooped up stocks across the board on increased expectations of a speedy conclusion to the war in Afghanistan.
Helping fuel bullish sentiment were upbeat financial results from retailing giants such as Home Depot Inc. and a positive forecast from top semiconductor company Texas Instruments Inc. 
The blue-chip Dow Jones industrial average gained 195.58 points, or 2.06 percent, to end at 9,750.95.
The technology-packed Nasdaq Composite Index rose 51.96 points, or 2.82 percent, to 1,892.09 while the broader Standard Poor's 500 Index climbed 20.76 points, or 1.86 percent, to 1,139.09.
The Nasdaq and S P 500 posted their highest closes since late August, and the highest finish for the Dow since Sept. 6.
Year-to-date, however, the Dow is down 9.6 percent, Nasdaq off 23.4 percent, and the S P 500 has lost 13.7 percent. 
"Investors are certainly acting like (the war) is not going to be a protracted drag on economic activity," said Charlie Crane, a strategist at Victory SBSF Capital Management, which oversees $4 billion.
"It allows investors to focus on what positives may unfold as a result of monetary and fiscal stimuli that have been applied with a very heavy hand over the last several months."
The Taliban's hard-line Islamic rule of Afghanistan appeared to be in tatters after the opposition Northern Alliance took control of the capital Kabul and other key areas.
The United States has been waging war against the Taliban and their "guest," Usama bin Laden, chief suspect in the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. 
Meanwhile, officials in the United States said early information suggested Monday's crash of an American Airlines passenger jet was an accident -- and not a terror attack.
The crash, which killed up to 269 people, had raised fears another assault had been waged against the United States. 
Airline stocks rebounded after suffering steep losses after the crash, with the Standard Poor's airline index rebounded 4.68 percent after falling 6 percent on Monday. 
Corp., the parent of American Airlines, rose 51 cents, or 3 percent, to $17.
UAL Corp., the parent of United Airlines, climbed 58 cents to $10.91.
Delta Air Lines rose $1.41 to $24.68, or more than 6 percent.
The S P hotel index bounced 5.19 percent up after losses on Monday.
Marriott International rose $2.17 to $34.67 and Starwood Hotels added $2 at $34.50.
Semiconductors like Intel Corp. jumped on hopes the chip industry had scraped bottom.
Texas Instruments rose $1.90 to $33.80 after reaffirming its outlook and saying the third quarter could mark a bottom for semiconductor orders.
Intel added $1.67 to $30.05. 
The Philadelphia Stock Exchange semiconductor index rose 4.1 percent reflecting gains by other firms in the sector like Applied Materials, up $1.84 to $40.80.
Oracle Corp. slipped 88 cents to $14.52 after the investment bank Credit Suisse First Boston cut its rating on the business software maker, citing weakening demand.
The downgrade came after Oracle suggested at a technology conference its results will land below consensus estimates. 
Compaq Computer Corp. bolted 14.8 percent higher after Lehman Brothers analyst Dan Niles said the computer maker's fourth quarter is on track and that Compaq's stock is attractive whether or not its planned merger with rival Hewlett-Packard Co. goes through.
Compaq, the most active issue on the New York Stock Exchange, rose $1.14 to $8.80 while HP was up 93 cents at $20.23, or 4.8 percent.
Home Depot Inc., the world's largest home-improvement retailer, tacked on a $2.88 gain to $44.
The Dow component's earnings rose 20 percent as cost controls helped the retailer weather an uncertain economy. 
Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the world's largest retailer, reported an 8 percent increase in profits, as consumers sought low-priced goods in the stalled economy, and said profit growth should return to about 15 percent next year.
Its stock, however, fell 58 cents to $55, dragging on the Dow index.
Drugmaker Watson Pharmaceuticals Inc. sank $18.61 or more than 39 percent, to $28.54 after the drugmaker posted a loss and was refocusing away from the competitive generic drugs business. 
Advancing issues outnumbered decliners by a 7 to 3 margin on the New York Stock Exchange, where volume came to 1.33 billion shares, up from 991.3 million shares the previous day. 
The Russell 2000 index, which tracks smaller company stocks, rose 7.24 to 447.72. 
Overseas, Japan's Nikkei stock average fell 0.5 percent.
Germany's DAX index was up 2.6 percent, Britain's FT-SE 100 was up 2.5 percent, and France's CAC-40 was up 4.3 percent.
Reuters and the Associated Press contributed to this report.
Maybe someone at the Salt Lake Ice Center had a cruel sense of humor.
Or just wasn't a Michelle Kwan fan.
Whatever the reason, as the crowd filed out after Sarah Hughes stunned Kwan to win the Olympic figure skating gold medal Thursday night, the P.A. system played U2's "Still Haven't Found What I'm Looking For."
Kwan might never find that elusive gold.
She has done everything else in the sport, including winning six U.S. titles and four world championships.
She's been at the top since 1996.
But her Olympic medals collection consists of a silver behind Tara Lipinski in 1998, and now a bronze behind Hughes and Kwan's Russian rival and friend, Irina Slutskaya.
"I think I was a little more disappointed in Nagano, just because I skated much better," Kwan said.
"Tonight it was one of those things.
I don't know what didn't go my way.
"I guess it's different.
But both ended up crying.
"
Kwan won the short program, worth one-third of the total score.
She still was in first place after her mediocre free skate, but knew if Slutskaya, the final skater, beat her scores, she would drop to third.
That's why there was no expression in her face as she sat holding her father
Danny's hand before Slutskaya skated.
And that's why her eyes were red and puffy after Slutskaya finished second in Thursday night's portion, lifting Hughes to the title ? and tearing that golden disc from Kwan's grasp.
"It's a bummer, but it is competition," Kwan said.
"I can keep my head high and I guess the color medal doesn't matter to me.
"I just had to remind myself, it's OK, it's OK."
But it was not supposed to end this way ? again.
Unlike in 1998, the 21-year-old Kwan took in the whole Olympic experience and it seemed to settle her.
She had great practices, and looked looser before she skated than she has in years.
She even waved into a television camera before warming up Thursday night.
Then she never really got started in her long program.
Kwan two-footed her triple toe loop jump, the opener of a combination, and crashed to the ice on her triple flip.
Her tricks weren't as tough as Hughes' jumps, and she didn't have the 16-year-old's energy, either.
"I made an early mistake, on the triple toe, and it kind of shook me up a little bit," she said.
"I think I rushed a little bit into the triple flip and triple toe.
"It is so hard to analyze each performance.
I have done my long program so many times
and I treated it like practice."
Kwan doesn't want to make a practice of Olympic underachievement, but she'll need to stick around four more years for another shot at the gold.
While she has hinted she intends to be in Turin, Italy, in 2006, those plans quickly could change.
After all, Kwan already has been in the sport's glaring spotlight since 1994.
"I haven't decided yet, a lot of people asked me what my decision was," she said.
"I enjoy competing, I do love the sport a lot and it gives me a lot of pleasure, a lot of joy."
And some heartbreak ? particularly at the Olympics.
Still, Kwan was wearing a gift of gold following the event.
Dorothy Hamill, the 1976 Olympic champion, gave her a dimestore plastic gold medal.
She was wearing it along with the real bronze medal.
"It's not as heavy as this (bronze) one," she said, holding up the toy gold. "
But it's just as nice.
This is the color medal I would have liked."
Faced with an enemy that has virtually collapsed as an organized fighting force, the United States scaled back its bombing campaign in Afghanistan Thursday and began the tedious job of hunting down Usama bin Laden among the caves and tunnels dotting the country's southern landscape.
Carpet-bombing raids and airstrikes against Taliban front lines are giving way to more precise efforts ?
special operations troops questioning Taliban defectors and prisoners, dangling millions in reward money and hoping for a communications slip-up.
Warplanes are focusing more on bombing mountain hideouts and caves where bin Laden might try to disappear. 
The United States is bombing areas in the south and in the east, especially around Jalalabad, where bin Laden is known to have hideouts.
"Bunker-buster" bombs can dig under the surface and explode in a tunnel.
Fuel-air explosives can produce tremendous heat and suck out a cave or tunnel's oxygen. 
Defectors and prisoners are probably the best hope for information on where bin Laden is now, said a former senior U.S. intelligence official with experience in South Asia.
Even rumors or hints ?
about something such as a recent supply run to a cave, for example ? could prove a breakthrough. 
In addition, "It may very well be that money will talk at some point," Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said Wednesday, referring to the millions in reward money the United States has offered. 
Or, Taliban troops and commanders on the run might take fewer precautions with radios and phones, allowing U.S. eavesdropping aircraft to pick up communications and thus get hints to bin Laden's location. 
U.S. special forces also have been watching roads in southern Afghanistan to see who passes by, Rumsfeld said, and "to stop people that they think ought to be stopped." 
Bin Laden is believed to move from cave to cave ?
some a three days' walk into the mountains ?
with only a group of highly trusted aides. 
Taliban officials said bin Laden and their own supreme leader, Mullah Mohammad Omar, were safe and in Afghanistan, the Afghan Islamic Press said.
"They are in Afghanistan and there has been no harm to them," the private Pakistan-based AIP quoted Taliban spokesman Mullah Abdullah as saying.
Asked whether the beleaguered Taliban were ready to strike a compromise with the United States on handing over bin Laden, Abdullah said: "There is no change in our position on the issue of Usama." 
With opposition forces reported to be taking over Kandahar's airport, the Taliban are giving up hope of defending the city and are escaping into the mountains, Pentagon sources told Fox News.
The U.S. effort to foster dissent among Pashtun leaders has persuaded some of the groups to rise up, although tribes are acting on their own volition, a U.S. official said. 
Taliban supporters say the withdrawal from urban areas throughout Afghanistan is a strategy that will allow the militia and its allies to wage a guerrilla war from Kandahar's rugged mountains and caves.
Pentagon officials now believe that two-thirds of Afghanistan is under the control of anti-Taliban forces, including opposition forces in the far west of the country.
Meanwhile, Northern Alliance officials in Kabul quickly returned Wednesday to the government offices they abandoned in 1996 when the Taliban drove them from power.
Officials portrayed the takeover of key ministries, such as defense and interior, as temporary, and said they support a U.N.-supervised political settlement in which all ethnic groups would be represented.
Afghanistan's former king, Mohammed Zaher Shah, urged the Afghan people to unite and freely choose their own destiny in a statement made public Wednesday to be broadcast by radio in his homeland. 
Zaher Shah, who has lived in exile in Italy since his ouster in 1973, called for "solidarity, unity and cooperation" and said the holding of a meeting of tribal leaders was the only way to bring a government representing all Afghan factions. 
Aides to the former king said he intended to return to Afghanistan soon to serve as a symbol of national unity, though Zaher Shah has said he does not seek to regain the throne.
Fox News' Bret Baier and The Associated Press contributed to this report.
Stocks soared Tuesday, with the broad market hitting levels unseen since late August as investors scooped up stocks across the board on increased expectations of a speedy conclusion to the war in Afghanistan.
Helping fuel bullish sentiment were upbeat financial results from retailing giants such as Home Depot Inc. and a positive forecast from top semiconductor company Texas Instruments Inc. 
The blue-chip Dow Jones industrial average gained 195.58 points, or 2.06 percent, to end at 9,750.95.
The technology-packed Nasdaq Composite Index rose 51.96 points, or 2.82 percent, to 1,892.09 while the broader Standard Poor's 500 Index climbed 20.76 points, or 1.86 percent, to 1,139.09.
The Nasdaq and S P 500 posted their highest closes since late August, and the highest finish for the Dow since Sept. 6.
Year-to-date, however, the Dow is down 9.6 percent, Nasdaq off 23.4 percent, and the S P 500 has lost 13.7 percent. 
"Investors are certainly acting like (the war) is not going to be a protracted drag on economic activity," said Charlie Crane, a strategist at Victory SBSF Capital Management, which oversees $4 billion.
"It allows investors to focus on what positives may unfold as a result of monetary and fiscal stimuli that have been applied with a very heavy hand over the last several months."
The Taliban's hard-line Islamic rule of Afghanistan appeared to be in tatters after the opposition Northern Alliance took control of the capital Kabul and other key areas.
The United States has been waging war against the Taliban and their "guest," Usama bin Laden, chief suspect in the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. 
Meanwhile, officials in the United States said early information suggested Monday's crash of an American Airlines passenger jet was an accident -- and not a terror attack.
The crash, which killed up to 269 people, had raised fears another assault had been waged against the United States. 
Airline stocks rebounded after suffering steep losses after the crash, with the Standard Poor's airline index rebounded 4.68 percent after falling 6 percent on Monday. 
Corp., the parent of American Airlines, rose 51 cents, or 3 percent, to $17.
UAL Corp., the parent of United Airlines, climbed 58 cents to $10.91.
Delta Air Lines rose $1.41 to $24.68, or more than 6 percent.
The S P hotel index bounced 5.19 percent up after losses on Monday.
Marriott International rose $2.17 to $34.67 and Starwood Hotels added $2 at $34.50.
Semiconductors like Intel Corp. jumped on hopes the chip industry had scraped bottom.
Texas Instruments rose $1.90 to $33.80 after reaffirming its outlook and saying the third quarter could mark a bottom for semiconductor orders.
Intel added $1.67 to $30.05. 
The Philadelphia Stock Exchange semiconductor index rose 4.1 percent reflecting gains by other firms in the sector like Applied Materials, up $1.84 to $40.80.
Oracle Corp. slipped 88 cents to $14.52 after the investment bank Credit Suisse First Boston cut its rating on the business software maker, citing weakening demand.
The downgrade came after Oracle suggested at a technology conference its results will land below consensus estimates. 
Compaq Computer Corp. bolted 14.8 percent higher after Lehman Brothers analyst Dan Niles said the computer maker's fourth quarter is on track and that Compaq's stock is attractive whether or not its planned merger with rival Hewlett-Packard Co. goes through.
Compaq, the most active issue on the New York Stock Exchange, rose $1.14 to $8.80 while HP was up 93 cents at $20.23, or 4.8 percent.
Home Depot Inc., the world's largest home-improvement retailer, tacked on a $2.88 gain to $44.
The Dow component's earnings rose 20 percent as cost controls helped the retailer weather an uncertain economy. 
Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the world's largest retailer, reported an 8 percent increase in profits, as consumers sought low-priced goods in the stalled economy, and said profit growth should return to about 15 percent next year.
Its stock, however, fell 58 cents to $55, dragging on the Dow index.
Drugmaker Watson Pharmaceuticals Inc. sank $18.61 or more than 39 percent, to $28.54 after the drugmaker posted a loss and was refocusing away from the competitive generic drugs business. 
Advancing issues outnumbered decliners by a 7 to 3 margin on the New York Stock Exchange, where volume came to 1.33 billion shares, up from 991.3 million shares the previous day. 
The Russell 2000 index, which tracks smaller company stocks, rose 7.24 to 447.72. 
Overseas, Japan's Nikkei stock average fell 0.5 percent.
Germany's DAX index was up 2.6 percent, Britain's FT-SE 100 was up 2.5 percent, and France's CAC-40 was up 4.3 percent.
Reuters and the Associated Press contributed to this report.
The Postal Service, battered by anthrax attacks that have left two workers dead, others sick and the public nervous about its mail, is turning to Congress for financial help. 
Postmaster General John Potter has said the attacks will cost the post office billions of dollars, and estimates of damage and loss of revenues have ranged from $3 billion to $7 billion or more. 
"Extraordinary expenditures will be required," Robert Rider, chairman of the Postal Service Board of Governors, said this week.
"We strongly believe these costs should not be borne by our customers through increased rates." 
Rider said the costs should be considered part of homeland defense, and several lawmakers have said they want to include aid for the Postal Service as part of a new $20 billion package of spending related to terrorism. 
President Bush said Tuesday, however, he would veto any spending beyond the $40 billion Congress appropriated after the Sept. 11 airliner hijackings but before the outbreak of mailed anthrax. 
Nonetheless, Potter was expected to get a sympathetic audience Thursday before a Senate Appropriations subcommittee. 
Deputy Postmaster General John Nolan said Thursday it will be after Jan. 1 before the post office has a firm handle on how much money it needs. 
"We don't know exactly the technology we'll be using (to sanitize mail), although we have begun to purchase some, and we're waiting to see the end of the Christmas holiday season to see whether the volume picks back up again," Nolan said on ABC's "Good Morning America."
"So I would expect that those final numbers will be available right after the first of the year." 
Before the attacks, the post office had expected to finish this fiscal year $1.35 billion in the red and is seeking a rate increase to take effect next year. 
But that did not anticipate costs from the hijacking attacks, including damage to post offices and sharp increases in transportation costs because of limits on what mail commercial planes can now carry. 
Then the anthrax attacks occurred. 
The agency has leased machinery to sanitize the mail, is purchasing other machines and has spent a large amount on testing post offices, buying masks and gloves for workers and on medical care for its staff. 
At the same time mail volume, and thus income, dropped sharply.
In the four weeks after Sept. 11 there were 6.6 billion fewer mail items than the corresponding period a year ago. 
In Bellmawr, N.J., a federal judge closed a postal distribution facility Wednesday after workers complained that they weren't sure it was free of anthrax.
A postal workers union said an outside contractor had cleaned the wrong machine after anthrax spores were found on a barcode-sorting device. 
Judge Jerome P. Simandle said the facility should remain closed until an arbitrator considers the union's complaints.
A worker at the station is being tested for skin anthrax. 
Potter and other postal officials met Wednesday with leaders in the mail industry to discuss the agency's future and how to restore confidence in the mail. 
Potter announced that Gary Mulloy, president of the advertising firm Advo, donated $250,000 to increase the reward for information leading to whoever sent anthrax in the mail.
That reward now stands at $1.25 million. 
"The anthrax attacks are changing the way all of us do business," Potter said.
He said the business leaders "explored new avenues for making the mail they send to American households and business even safer than it is today." 
Mail-related industries ranging from catalog sales to greeting cards to film developing employ 9 million Americans and contribute $900 billion to the national economy annually, Potter noted. 
While more than 30 billion pieces of mail have been delivered since Sept. 11, just three letters are known to have been tainted with anthrax, though others are suspected. 
Those letters "have done damage to the psyche of the American public when it comes to handling mail," Potter said.
"We are going to work together to ensure that we restore confidence in the mail." 
Michael Sherman, president of the mail-order catalog company Fingerhut, said his business has changed its packaging to make the name of the company more visible on both parcels and advertising pieces. 
"We want people to understand what it is that we're sending them and that it's from us," he said. 
Sherman and others said they have not encountered major problems getting mail delivered.
Postal officials have said service is normal in most of the country, though there have been delivery problems in areas affected by anthrax, such as Washington. 
C. Hamilton Davison Jr., president of Paramount Cards, encouraged people to put return addresses on all items. 
"That's a big help.
When the recipient gets a package or envelope from you, they're going to recognize that name, and they're going to recognize that address," he said.
Zimbabwe One day before Zimbabwe's presidential elections, Stephen Bongozozo stood in line with hundreds of people Friday waiting for corn meal and pleading for help to feed his hungry family.
His country's economy has crashed.
Hundreds of thousands of people are desperately short of food.
And political violence is rampant across the land.
But when he is asked about the election, he grows quiet.
"I can't talk too much.
I don't know what might happen to me," the 36-year-old laborer said.
As Zimbabweans prepare to vote Saturday and Sunday, many are terrified to express an opinion about the most competitive elections in the nation's history.
Over the past two years, more than 150 people have been killed, thousands tortured and 70,000 made homeless by political violence mainly caused by ruling party militants, according to the Human Rights Forum, a consortium of human rights groups.
In what appeared to be a show of government force before voting began, witnesses in Harare on Friday reported unusually heavy movements of soldiers and military vehicles, including armored cars around the capital.
No information on troop movements was available from the authorities.
The few pre-election polls reveal more about voters' fears than about whether President Robert Mugabe or Morgan Tsvangirai will win.
In a market in the poor Glen Norah neighborhood of Harare, people spoke Friday of militants from Mugabe's party living in a nearby camp who invade the neighborhood every evening, drag off opposition supporters and torture them.
"The electorate is totally intimidated," said Munyaradzi Bidi, the director of Zim Rights, a local human rights group.
The election is the biggest challenge to Mugabe, the 78-year-old head of the Zimbabwe African National Union Patriotic Front party, since he led Zimbabwe to independence in 1980.
Mugabe has promised a host of public works initiatives if he is re-elected and has pledged to continue his controversial program of seizing white-owned farms and giving them to landless blacks.
Campaigning under the slogan "Do not betray your heritage," Mugabe has called Tsvangirai a servant to white interests and Western powers who want to see the country fail.
At an election rally in Bindura, about 60 miles north of Harare, Mugabe mocked the opposition Movement for Democratic Change, calling it "the Members of Death Corporation."
"(It) will be buried.
We will deal with their ghost," Mugabe told some 10,000 supporters.
Tsvangirai, 49, is promising to revive the economy, end corruption and promote a more orderly land reform system.
At a campaign stop Friday in an industrial area of Harare, Tsvangirai urged screaming supporters to vote despite the "intimidation on a massive scale."
"We will have the last laugh," he said.
"We must ensure this victory is not stolen by Mugabe."
Human rights groups and many political analysts say the election already is too tainted to be free and fair.
The violence is rampant throughout the country, police have canceled scores of opposition rallies and Mugabe has used his presidential powers to restore controversial election laws struck down by the Supreme Court that appear to make it easier to rig the vote.
The Movement for Democratic Change had asked the Supreme Court to overturn Mugabe's decree, resolve confusion relating to voter registration and the location of polling stations and allow the polls to remain open beyond the weekend if long lines made it impossible for some people to vote.
But late Friday, the Supreme Court decided to defer a decision until after the election.
"This is an absolute travesty," said Adrian de Bourbon, lawyer for the opposition.
Late Friday, the opposition said the state was delaying the accreditation of up to 15,000 polling agents representing the Movement for Democratic Change just hours before voting was scheduled to begin.
Opposition officials also said one of its lawmakers and several of its polling agents were assaulted by uniformed troops in eastern Zimbabwe Friday.
Two weeks ago, Tsvangirai was charged with treason in connection with an alleged plot to assassinate Mugabe.
In newspaper advertisements, the ruling party calls the election a choice between "Plots to Kill" and "Plots to Till."
At a recent Mugabe rally in the rural area of Chinhoyi, 75 miles north of Harare, laborer Godfrey Jacob said he supported the president because "he fought for the liberation struggle."
When asked about Tsvangirai, Jacob said he did not know enough to form an opinion since state-run radio and television, the only news source in rural areas, nearly ignored the opposition candidate.
Jim Zonda, a 75-year-old Mugabe supporter in Harare, said the country's economy will revive once Mugabe is re-elected."Starting from tomorrow, everything will be all right," he said.
But many opposition supporters in Harare, too frightened to give their names, wondered why Mugabe was only going to fix the country after the election.
"There is no order in Zimbabwe," one man yelled as he walked away from the food line.
Joseph Mahutu, an unemployed 23-year-old, said he hopes the opposition can bring real change to the country and end the violence and economic destruction.
"We are expecting something better, maybe," he said.
Candidates in this odd-year election headed to the polls Tuesday morning, presumably to cast ballots for themselves, and then got underway gladhanding voters at poll stations across the country.
In Virginia, Democrat millionaire businessman Mark Warner cast his vote in Richmond at 7:30.
Republican Attorney General Mark Earley was escorting his parents to the polls before casting his vote.
New York's Democrat Mark Green and Republican Michael Bloomberg started their meet-and-greets just after the polls opened at 6 a.m.Three key races are taking place in states touched by terrorism.
In New York City, the nasty mayoral race to succeed Rudolph Giuliani has candidates arguing they are better able to handle Ground Zero recovery.
In New Jersey, a gubernatorial contest favors a Democrat in a Republican-held state where investigators are also focusing on the anthrax probe.
And Virginia, home of the scarred Pentagon where the war on terror is run, is also set to vote on a new governor. 
In all, Election Day will decide the mayors of 362 cities, including Atlanta, Boston, Cleveland, Houston, Miami, Minneapolis, and Seattle. 
Miami has 10 candidates, Houston has six running for mayor.
But no race has had the attention, spending or stakes that have gone with the race to succeed New York's Giuliani.
Democrat Mark Green, who has spent eight years as public advocate and become a regular on the election circuit, is running against media mogul Republican Michael Bloomberg.
Bloomberg has spent more than $40 million of his own money on his campaign.
Both insist that they are better qualified to lead the city's recovery from the Sept. 11 terrorist attack.
Each accused the other of mudslinging and racially divisive tactics. 
Green held a big lead in the polls until Bloomberg finally gained Giuliani's endorsement last week.
On Monday, a Quinnipiac University poll had the two running at 42-42 percent, with 15 percent of the vote undecided. 
Two weeks ago, Green was beating Bloomberg 51-35 but that was before Giuliani taped a commercial endorsing Bloomberg that has saturated the airwaves.
Giuliani has received near-universal support for his handling of the Sept. 11 attacks that brought down the World Trade Center and killed more than 4,000 people.
Shortly following the attacks, the state Legislature briefly dawdled with the idea of extending the mayor's term or lifting term limits.
Bloomberg also ran an ad that quotes Green as saying he could have handled the World Trade Center tragedy as well as or better than Giuliani.
Then the commercial asks, "Really?" 
Green has countered by noting that Bloomberg once belonged to whites-only clubs and was the target of a sexual harassment suit by a former employee in 1997.
He also has the advantage of running in a town that is five-to-one registered Democrat, though turnout, notoriously unpredictable, continues to be the unknown for all Tuesday's races.
In the nation's only gubernatorial races, polls gave sizable leads to moderate Democrats Jim McGreevey in New Jersey and Mark Warner in Virginia.
Both states have Republican governors who are not seeking re-election. McGreevey, a suburban mayor, skipped campaigning for a third straight day Monday to be with his pregnant wife, who is hospitalized.
Wife Dina is seven months pregnant and suffering from mid-term labor, which doctors are trying to arrest. 
McGreevey's campaign said he would make only two public appearances Tuesday -- to vote late in the day and to declare victory or concede defeat. 
Former Jersey City mayor Republican Bret Schundler cast his vote with his family Tuesday morning at Jersey City Library.
Shundler was running behind McGreevey 39-48 in Monday's Quinnipiac poll with 12 percent undecided.
A conservative, Schundler won a stunning upset primary victory for the GOP nomination by blasting the state's more moderate Republican establishment.
That set him up for criticism in the general election from McGreevey, who painted him as out of touch with New Jersey voters.
In Virginia, Warner, who made a fortune with high-tech investments, has benefited from Republican infighting over the state's fiscal troubles.
GOP opponent Earley has tried to capitalize on Warner's lack of political experience.
Warner has run for Senate against Sen. John Warner and was chairman of the state Democratic Party but has never held elected office.
The race began on a nasty note but softened after the Sept. 11 attacks.
Warner, however, has outspent Earley every step of the way, and has run on traditionally Republican themes, including tax cuts and gun rights, an influential issue in the state that houses the National Rifle Association.
Earley is also suffering from structural problems in Virginia's GOP organization.
The party had a spectacular run in recent years, taking the governor, lieutenant governor, House of Delegates, and state Senate, but did not plan ahead for the 2002 campaign in terms of message, money or organization.
The Republican National Committee, led by Va.
Gov. Jim Gilmore, did give Gilmore's attorney general $3 million but it does not compare to funding Warner has drawn from his personal fortune. 
Seeking to avoid overt partisanship at a time of national crisis, President Bush decided not to campaign personally for Schundler or Earley, though he extended long-distance support by signing letters endorsing the candidates. 
"The president just makes those judgments on the basis of what he thinks is right," said White House spokesman Ari Fleischer, who said Tuesday's results would reflect local issues rather than any verdict on Bush's anti-terrorism strategy. 
Heading into Election Day, there were 29 Republican governors, 19 Democrats and two independents. 
In some cities with mayoral elections ? such as Boston and Pittsburgh ?
incumbents were expected to breeze to re-election. 
Fuller has criticized Luken for imposing a curfew in September after a white officer was acquitted in the fatal shooting of a black man.
The death set off rioting in April. 
Atlanta, Cleveland, Detroit, and Seattle will all get new mayors after incumbents depart.
Outgoing Atlanta Mayor Bill Campbell's administration has been entangled in corruption scandals; Seattle Mayor Paul Schell lost in a primary, at least in part because of the city's struggles to cope with rioting during a World Trade Organization meeting in late 1999. 
One would impose the highest tobacco taxes in the nation, boosting the price of a cigarette pack to nearly $5.
The other would prohibit local governments from raising property taxes by more than 1 percent each year unless voters authorize a larger increase. 
Opponents of the property-tax initiative noted that the inflation rate often is more than 1 percent, and warned that local officials would be forced into making damaging budget cuts if the measure passed. 
Fox News' Carl Cameron and the Associated Press contributed to this report .
PHOENIX
The final World Series comeback belonged to the Arizona Diamondbacks, in the form of a Luis Gonzalez RBI single that capped a two-run rally off Mariano Rivera in the bottom of the ninth inning. 
As Arizona stunned the New York Yankees 3-2 in Game 7 on Sunday night, Curt Schilling sat frozen in the dugout. 
Randy Johnson, not far away, couldn't believe his eyes.
"I wouldn't move on the bench.
I wanted to get up and watch for the whole inning, but I was playing the luck seat," said Schilling, who shared the MVP award with Johnson. 
"It seemed pretty surreal to me, watching this all develop," Johnson said. 
The Yankees were only two outs from their fourth straight championship and fifth in six years when it suddenly fell apart. 
Tony Womack tied it with an RBI double and Craig Counsell was hit by a pitch to load the bases with one out.
Gonzalez, choking up on the bat for the first time this year, blooped a soft single to center field. 
"When you're a little kid, you think about the seventh game of the World Series," Gonzalez said.
"It didn't matter how the hit came." 
Rivera, who had saved 23 straight postseason games, could do nothing but watch the ball fall in to end the Yankees' run. 
"That's baseball," Rivera said.
"There's nothing I can do about it." 
The Yankees were trying to become the third team in history to win four titles in a row.
The Bronx Bombers did it from 1936-39 and from 1949-53. 
"We're obviously disappointed in the result, but not the effort," Yankees manager Joe Torre said. 
When the Yankees were close to winning, some people started setting up the clubhouse for a celebration.
Owner George Steinbrenner threw them out. 
"I'm proud of my team.
We played our hearts out.
It was a very tough loss.
I will be a gracious loser," he said.
"We'll be back.
Mark that down.
We'll be back. 
"I'm not a good loser," he said. 
What began as a November duel between Schilling and Roger Clemens climaxed with the Diamondbacks winning the title in just their fourth year of existence. 
It was the fastest rise in history, breaking the mark of five years set by the 1997 Marlins.
That Florida team was the last to win when trailing in the ninth inning of a Game 7, doing it against Cleveland. 
The Diamondbacks bounced back from two of the toughest losses in Series history.
They dropped Games 4 and 5 at Yankee Stadium, blowing two-run leads in the bottom of the ninth both times. 
Johnson, at 38, earned the victory in relief.
He also won Game 6 on Saturday night, a 15-2 romp. 
Johnson was 3-0, making him the first pitcher to win three times in a Series since Detroit's Mickey Lolich in 1968.
The Big Unit won five times in this postseason. 
Johnson, Schilling and several Arizona old-timers, including Gonzalez, Mark Grace, Matt Williams and Mike Morgan, won their first championship ring. 
"We went through sports' greatest dynasty to win our first World Series," Schilling said. 
Arizona's Bob Brenly became the first manager to win the championship in his first year since Ralph Houk did it with the Yankees in 1961. 
"I felt that we outplayed them," Brenly said. 
The Diamondbacks outscored New York 37-14 in the Series in which the home team won every game, just the third time that has ever happened. 
The Yankees, the team that would not give up, nearly won it for the city that would not give in.
A highly motivated bunch, they showed extra resolve after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks in New York. 
"That was the greatest Game 7 ever," said New York City Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, who went to the Diamondbacks locker room to offer his congratulations them.
"
As a Yankees fan, I wish it turned out differently." 
The Yankees were a home run swing away from elimination in the first round against Oakland, and lost the first two games at Bank One Ballpark. 
But back in the desert, they looked lost. 
Alfonso Soriano's solo homer off Schilling put New York ahead 2-1 in the eighth.
Rivera, the most dominant reliever in postseason history, set down the Diamondbacks in the bottom half. 
Then in the ninth, Arizona rallied. 
Grace led off with a single and Rivera threw away Damian Miller's bunt for an error, putting runners at first and second. 
Jay Bell bunted into a force play at third, but Womack lined a tying double to the right-field corner.
Counsell, who scored the winning run in Game 7 with Florida in 1997, was hit by a pitch. 
With the infield in, Gonzalez hit it hard enough for a game-winning single that set off fireworks, pounding music and deafening cheers. 
The on-field trophy celebration was still going more than an hour later. 
Rivera had pitched six scoreless innings in the Series before Arizona won. 
"That was the one guy we wanted to stay away from the whole World Series," Gonzalez said.
"We got him the one time it counted." 
The Yankees fell to 5-6 overall in deciding Game 7s of the Series. 
Schilling was nearly untouchable at the start.
The first pitcher to start three games in a Series since Minnesota's Jack Morris in 1991, he once again showed no ill effects from working on three days' rest. 
Schilling allowed only one hitter to reach through six innings, and even that guy did not last long on the bases.
Paul O'Neill, playing his final game before retiring at 38, was thrown out trying to stretch a double into a triple in the first. 
But given a 1-0 lead in the sixth on Danny Bautista's RBI double, Schilling gave it back. 
Schilling retired 16 straight hitters before slumping Derek Jeter led off with a single and O'Neill followed with a single in front of center fielder Steve Finley. 
One out later, Tino Martinez tied it with an RBI single. 
Clemens, pitching the biggest game of his great career, worked out of several early jams.
The Diamondbacks caught up to him in the sixth after Finley led off with a single. 
Bautista was next, and many people thought the man with five RBIs in Saturday's 15-2 romp would bunt.
Brenly once again crossed up his critics and let Bautista swing away, and it worked. 
Bautista hit a drive into the left-center gap, and Clemens simply stood on the mound with his right hand on hip, watching the play unfold. 
Clemens was pulled after 6 1-3 innings with 10 strikeouts.
He left without a Game 7 victory, the only thing missing on his Hall of Fame resume.
The Associated Press contributed to this report.
U.S. forces have uncovered evidence that Usama bin Laden may have begun developing weapons of mass destruction, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said Sunday. 
Some sites in Afghanistan that may have been used to create chemical, radiological or biological weapons have been bombed by the U.S., Rumsfeld said.
Other sites have been left alone, and others likely have not been found, he added. 
Once there are indications that such weapons are being produced at a specific location, "are you best taking it out or are you best learning more about it?"
Rumsfeld asked rhetorically on Fox News Sunday . 
The New York Times reported Sunday that the United States had identified three possible weapons-building sites in Afghanistan used by bin Laden's Al Qaeda network, and had avoided bombing them. 
In a recent interview with a Pakistani journalist, bin Laden claimed to have weapons of mass destruction, but said he would not use them unless the United States used such weapons first. 
Rumsfeld said he is worried bin Laden's boast of having weapons that could kill hundreds or several thousands at time may be true.
He said Al Qaeda is known to have links to terrorism-sponsoring countries that can make chemical, biological and radiological weapons. 
From there's it's not a far step to the possibility that perhaps the world's most dangerous has a hold of some of the world's most dangerous weapons. 
"It does not take a leap of intelligence to know that if they have a relationship ... then bin Laden either has them, will have them or wants to have them," Rumsfeld said.
"I know a lot about it from intelligence.
On the other hand, you have to know a lot more to know precisely whether you have these capabilities that are readily usable." 
Radiological weapons are made with nuclear material, combined with conventional explosives, and spread radiation without creating a nuclear blast. 
Other leaders were skeptical of bin Laden's claims. 
Condoleezza Rice, President Bush's national security adviser, said there is "no credible evidence" bin Laden had acquired nuclear weapons.
Secretary of State Colin Powell said he thought it unlikely the Saudi exile had such weapons. 
Rice added that America is doing everything possible to make sure Al Qaeda does not get chemical or biological weapons. 
"We believe that we have a very, very aggressive program under way to make certain that he does not acquire them," Rice said on ABC's This Week. 
"We have every intelligence operation practically in the world on the problem of Al Qaeda and the Taliban and their weapons of mass destruction at this point."
LOS ANGELES
It's a true Battle of the Network Stars ?
except this time all the network stars may lose.
The twice-delayed Emmy Awards will finally air Sunday night, facing stiff resistance from a critically acclaimed, heavily promoted miniseries, a blockbuster movie and a little event known as the final game of the World Series.
"It's going to be quite a night of TV if the seventh game of the World Series gets on," Marc Berman, an analyst for Mediaweek , said before a 15-2 blowout of the New York Yankees by the Arizona Diamondbacks Saturday night meant that Sunday's game would be played.
Though it traditionally airs in September before the fall season starts, the original Sept. 16 date was postponed after the Sept. 11 attacks on New York City and Washington, D.C., made Joan Rivers' comments on Vera Wang gowns and overlong acceptance speeches for best-sitcom trophies seem trivial. 
The beginning of U.S. airstrikes on Afghanistan Oct. 7, the first rescheduked date, set the gala affair back yet again.
But the new date for the television industry's biggest event means that, while it'll be a great night for television in general, it could be a dismal night for television's stars and for CBS.
Besides Game 7 of the World Series, the show will go up against the final chapter of HBO's World War II epic Band of Brothers , the hit computer-animated movie Toy Story 2 , and part one of the World War II miniseries Uprising on NBC.
The pressure's on because the ceremony is airing on the first weekend of the November "sweeps" period, which is used to set local ad rates.
But Berman said the full television-programming buffet meant the Emmys would find its fans.
"When networks have the right programming on, when it's diversified and interesting, there still can be an audience for the Emmys and the miniseries," Berman said.
The awards are used to hogging the ratings.
Last year on ABC, the ceremony was the No. 3 program for the week of Sept. 4 and drew more than 21 million viewers -- its biggest audience since at least 1986, when Nielsen Media Research updated its methods for measuring viewers.
Normally, however, the ceremony airs against reruns.
Ellen DeGeneres is host of the ceremony, which has adopted a low-frills approach in light of the terrorist attacks.
The red-carpet fanfare of star arrivals has been reduced and participants were advised to wear dressy business attire instead of tuxedos and gowns. 
The West Wing and The Sopranos are vying for top honors in the 53rd annual primetime awards. 
The telecast begins at 8 p.m. EST.
The Associated Press contributed to this report
Afghanistan Two days after capturing a key northern city, Afghan opposition forces claimed Sunday they had also taken their former headquarters of Taloqan.
A Taliban official denied the claim. 
Taloqan, the capital of Takhar province, fell Sunday after a fierce battle outside the city with Taliban forces that included Arabs and Pakistanis, Northern Alliance spokesman Mohammed Abil said.
Once the external line of Taliban defense crumbled, opposition fighters swiftly occupied the city, he said. 
"There was fighting all last night and all today," Abil said.
He said the fall of Taloqan, which could not be independently confirmed, meant the Taliban still had a significant presence in only two northern provinces ?
Kunduz and Baghlan. 
Alliance forces planned to move into Kunduz late Sunday, Abil said. 
Taloqan is 140 miles east of Mazar-e-Sharif, which fell to the opposition on Friday, and some 155 miles north of the capital, Kabul. 
Abdul Hanan Hemat, chief of the Taliban's Bakhtar news agency, denied claims that Taloqan had fallen.
"They are lying," he said. 
Another opposition spokesman, Ashraf Nadeem, said Taliban forces also withdrew from the road-junction town of Pul-e-Khumri in Baghlan province and that alliance forces in the area were headed toward central Bamiyan province, west of Kabul. 
To the west, opposition official Noor Ahmad said advancing anti-Taliban troops seized Qala-i-Nau, capital of Badghis province, and were about 25 miles east of the major city of Herat. 
Despite the Taliban's denial that they lost Taloqan, the Islamic militia has acknowledged that its troops are withdrawing southward following weeks of round-the-clock U.S. bombing of their positions in the north. 
The Northern Alliance is comprised mainly of ethnic Uzbeks and Tajiks, while the Taliban derive their support from the country's dominant Pashtuns, who live mostly in the south, as well as in Pakistan. 
In Kabul, buildings shook and windows rattled on Sunday as American warplanes bombed the outskirts of the capital.
Heavy U.S. bombing overnight and into the day was intended to soften up Taliban positions. 
The fortunes of the Northern Alliance shifted dramatically following the Taliban withdrawal Friday from Mazar-e-Sharif, 45 miles south of the border with Uzbekistan. 
After seizing Mazar-e-Sharif, the opposition threatened to launch a major attack on Kabul within days.
However, President Bush said Saturday that opposition troops should steer clear of Kabul until a broad-based government including all ethnic groups could be formed. 
"We will encourage our friends to head south ... but not into the city of Kabul itself," Bush said at a news conference in New York with Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf ? whose country opposes a dominant role for the Northern Alliance in any future Afghan government. 
Bush's comments put plans for a major offensive toward Kabul on hold.
The opposition could not launch a successful attack against the city without strong U.S. air support. 
The groups constituting the Northern Alliance held Kabul for several years preceding the Taliban's 1996 capture of the capital.
Months-long street battles between different factions killed thousands of residents and devastated parts of the city. 
Gen. Alim Khan, a senior opposition commander along the front line north of Kabul, confirmed the offensive toward Kabul had been postponed and expressed frustration over U.S. opposition. 
"I'm tired of sitting around here doing nothing and my soldiers too," Khan said.
"We should be going to the front line. ...
If we want to enter Kabul we won't care about U.S. willingness or unwillingness." 
Another senior opposition officer at the Kabul front, deputy brigade commander Mir Rahman, said he thought "no one should interfere with our country or tell us what to do.
If I go to Kabul, I will not stop there." 
Elsewhere, the Bakhtar news agency said 200 civilians died in bombing Thursday night and Friday morning in Shah Aga village in southern Kandahar province, a Taliban stronghold.
There was no independent confirmation of the figure, and the Pentagon has accused the Taliban of inflating casualty figures. 
U.S. bombs also hit a tile factory on the eastern edge of Kabul on Saturday night, said Bakhtar chief Hemat.
Two men were missing and believed dead, he said. 
Inside Kabul, Taliban soldiers manned checkpoints, stopping cars and searching passengers.
The checkpoints were new and may have been prompted by the loss of northern territory and reports that opposition soldiers north of the city were preparing an offensive. 
Opposition spokesman Abil, speaking by satellite telephone from neighboring Parwan province, said he learned of Taloqan's fall from a radio message from the alliance defense minister, Mohammed Fahim. 
The opposition declared another success Sunday, saying a Taliban commander in central Bamiyan province had switched sides after seeing the battlefield momentum swing against him. 
The defection of the commander, Isamuddin, cut off the road for Taliban troops retreating from Mazar-e-Sharif to Kabul and isolated those still in the north, Abil said. 
The report of the Taliban commander's defection could not be independently verified. 
Bush launched the airstrikes after the Taliban refused to hand over Usama bin Laden, chief suspect in the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks in the United States, which killed about 4,500 people. 
In an interview with a Pakistani journalist published in two installments over the weekend in Ausaf, a widely circulated Pakistani Urdu-language newspaper, bin Laden was asked if he was behind the anthrax attacks in the United States. 
The terror suspect laughed and said: "We don't know anything about anthrax."
Increasing concern over lax immigration rules and border security has led the Justice Department to speed up its restructuring of the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Attorney General John Ashcroft announced Wednesday that INS duties will be split into two separate bureaus: law enforcement and immigration processing.
The separate departments will remain intact under one commissioner.
Ashcroft said DOJ moved quickly on the restructuring to counter the threat posed by terrorists taking advantage of loose immigration laws to come into the United States to commit terrorist acts. 
"What we do today is a way of reinforcing this concept that America welcomes those immigrants who come here to promote, build, elevate, dignify and lift up freedom.
But it will not -- our nation will not welcome those who come to destroy freedom and whose confidence is not in liberty, but is in the kind of subversion of liberty which the terrorist promotes," Ashcroft said. 
Thirteen of the 19 hijackers in the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks entered the United States legally, but no entry records exist for the other six.
The split will create a Bureau of Immigration Services, which will work to assist people who apply for benefits such as naturalization or permanent residency.
Improving the processing system was a campaign pledge by President Bush last year. 
The Bureau of Immigration Enforcement will oversee intelligence, investigations and the tracking of illegal aliens.
The restructuring should be complete by Sept. 20, 2003.
Commissioner James Ziglar joined Ashcroft for the announcement.
He said separating the bureaus but not completely severing them made sense because it will allow each bureau to concentrate on its mission while being able to easily share information.
It will also create very defined chains of command.
Ziglar said he will present the plan to Congress on Thursday.
Several representatives, including House Judiciary Committee chairman James Sensenbrenner, R-Wis., and Rep. George Gekas, R-Pa., who chairs the immigration subcommittee, have proposed abolishing the INS and creating two new agencies. 
"We look very much forward to working with the Congress, with Congressman Sensenbrenner, Congressman Gekas, who have been very diligent in their oversight of this process.
And we hope to be able to work out the process and the plan that will result in a much more effective INS," Ziglar said.
"But regardless of what the outcome is with respect to legislation or anything else, what we're doing, what we're announcing today and what we hope to do is something that will have a material positive effect on the performance of the INS." 
The Bush administration proceeded with the plan in part because it does not need congressional approval to do institute the changes, only to allocate funds to support the changes.
Separating the bureaus into two distinct agencies would require congressional approval.
Funding for INS application processing has nearly quadrupled since 1994 to $500 million, according to a General Accounting Office report issued in June.
Staff has doubled to 6,100.
At the same time, the INS backlog on processing applications increased nearly fourfold to about 3.9 million, the GAO said. 
The Associated Press contributed to this report .
Hurricane Michelle destroyed at least 2,000 homes and damaged another 8,000 in central Cuba, officials said Tuesday as they began totaling the damage from the weekend storm that killed five people nationwide. 
Half of Cuba was blacked out for a second night, and millions of residents remained without power, gas or water.
The government was working to rebuild the telecommunications network. 
Civil defense officials said the first tallies of destroyed homes came from Matanzas province, which was worst hit by Sunday's storm. 
"We were rebuilding the house," Jose Ramon Pedrozo said quietly as he tried to rescue a few wooden planks that once formed part of his modest home in Solis Viejo, a small town in Matanzas. "
Now we're going to start all over." 
The hurricane, which killed 12 people in Honduras, Nicaragua and Jamaica last week, lost some strength as it moved off Cuba, and it left Florida virtually untouched.
Authorities had ordered the Florida Keys evacuated. 
Michelle swept past the Bahamas capital of Nassau on Monday with 85 mph winds, flooding houses and cutting power.
At 10 a.m. EST
Tuesday, the storm was centered about 400 miles southwest of Bermuda and was barely a hurricane with winds of 74 mph. 
In Cuba, damages to telephone lines and microwave antennae that provide national long-distance service snarled communications between Havana and outlying regions. 
Outgoing international telephone service was restored before dawn Monday, but callers outside the country reported they were unable to call loved ones on the island. 
"I'm very worried because we don't know what happened to them," Isabel Nunez, 55, of Elizabeth, N.J., said of her relatives in Cuba. 
Although the power was shut off to prevent accidents during the storm, the government said extensive repairs must be made before it can be safely restored. 
When the storm made landfall on Cuba's southern coast, its winds were estimated at 130 mph.
Michelle caused at least 23 homes to collapse in Havana, on the northern shore, state television reported -- and more were expected to crumble as they dried out in the sun. 
The narrow streets in Solis Viejo and other towns in the central Cuban region were littered with palm branches and tiles blown off buildings.
Downed utility poles lay scattered in parks and front yards. 
Officials evacuated about 750,000 people before the storm.
Cuba's population is 11 million, with 2 million in Havana. 
Conditions in many parts of Cuba were unknown because of the communications problems, making it difficult even for the government to assess the damage. 
Cuba's National Defense said four people were killed in separate building collapses in Havana and Matanzas province.
One man drowned in Playa Larga on the coast in Matanzas, where Michelle made landfall. 
President Fidel Castro toured several affected regions Monday and stopped at the home of Elian Gonzalez, the boy at the center of a highly politicized child custody battle last year involving the United States. 
Castro greeted the Gonzalez family at their home in Cardenas, in Matanzas province.
Like many other Cuban homes, it was without electricity and other basic services. 
As he toured other parts of Matanzas province and Villa Clara province to the east, Castro reiterated fears that the storm had damaged key crops including coffee plants, citrus trees and sugarcane. 
In the Bahamas, the hurricane unleashed stinging winds and sheets of rain on Monday, ripping roofs off several wooden houses and tearing down traffic lights. 
Government offices, banks and public schools remained closed for a second day Tuesday.
Emergency crews were working to restore power and telephone service in areas where the hurricane brought down power lines. 
The radio tower of the station MORE FM was snapped in half by the winds, and several other broadcasters were out of commission. 
Nassau International Airport remained closed, pending inspection of the runway and the assessment of damage.
Some small planes were tossed across the tarmac. 
Before moving to the Bahamas, the hurricane's outer winds brushed Florida, where a tropical storm warning was lifted Monday afternoon for the Atlantic coast from the Upper Keys to the West Palm Beach area. 
In the Cayman Islands, several businesses in the capital, George Town, were damaged, including a waterfront jewelry store that lost some of its display window jewelry to the sea, police said.
Officials were still estimating damage.
The International Monetary Fund said Saturday the U.S. economy would experience a "mild recession" in the second half of 2001, the first official forecast of two straight quarters of contraction in the current economic slowdown. 
However, the IMF also predicted Saturday that the economy would recover and strengthen next year. 
Horst Koehler, the IMF managing director, issued a statement with further details of last week's revised estimates that predicted sharply lower growth in 2002 for the world's largest economy. 
The revised estimates took into account the impact of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks that destroyed the World Trade Center and damaged the Pentagon, exacerbating an existing economic downturn by devastating the travel industry. 
"The United States is now expected to experience a mild recession in the second half of 2001, followed by a recovery which strengthens through 2002," Koehler's statement said. 
The U.S. economy dipped into negative territory in the July-September quarter, declining at an annual rate of 0.4 percent.
Many analysts believe the contraction is accelerating in the current quarter, exacerbated by the thousands of layoffs in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks. 
U.S. Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill, attending a meeting of G-20 finance ministers here with Koehler, said Saturday he disagreed with the revised IMF estimates. 
"It's a difficult quarter and we'll see what we finally produce," O'Neill told a news conference.
In an earlier statement, he said the "fundamental strengths of the U.S. economy ?
our strong macroeconomic foundations and our dynamic and flexible labor and capital markets ? remain intact." 
On Thursday, the IMF sharply reduced its estimate for U.S. economic growth in 2002 and urged quick passage of an economic stimulus package to restore confidence.
O'Neill said then he rejected the IMF assessment as too negative, but added he supported quick passage of a stimulus bill making its way through Congress. 
The IMF put next year's U.S. growth rate at 0.7 percent, compared with a 2.2 percent forecast in October that was based on estimates made before the Sept. 11 attacks.
The revised rate would be the country's weakest performance since the last recession in 1990-91. 
The IMF also cut its forecast for Japan, the world's second-largest economy, predicting it would contract by 0.9 percent this year and 1.3 percent in 2002.
The October forecast had Japan's economy declining by 0.5 percent this year, but growing by 0.2 percent in 2002. 
As a result of revisions for the United States and Japan, the IMF lowered its expectations for global growth to 2.4 percent for this year and next. 
Many economists believe that any global rate below 2.5 percent constitutes a worldwide recession, given that increased economic output is not sufficient to handle an expanding population.
Last month, the IMF had put global growth at 2.6 percent for this year and 3.5 percent for 2002. 
For now, though, the 183-nation lending agency believes the impact of the U.S. downtown on the rest of the world should be less severe than America's last recession in 1990-91 or slumps in the early 1980s.
Fla.
Two astronauts stepped out into the vacuum of space Wednesday and successfully performed the riskiest surgery yet on the Hubble Space Telescope, a power-unit replacement that was likened to a heart transplant.
The operation required that Hubble be turned off completely for the first time in orbit, a frightening prospect for astronomers.
But after a four-hour, 25-minute shutdown, the newly installed unit was powered up and, to everyone's relief, passed its initial test.
"A postoperative report: We have a heartbeat," Mission Control informed the astronauts.
Within minutes, power was surging through other telescope systems.
The spacewalk, the third in as many days for shuttle Columbia's crew, got started late because of a leaky spacesuit.
An unusual and unexplained water seepage from astronaut John Grunsfeld's suit forced him to pull off his soaked top and get into a dry one.
It pushed back the spacewalk by two hours, adding dramatic suspense to an already tension-filled day.held off shutting down Hubble until Grunsfeld and Richard Linnehan were ready to start disconnecting the old power control unit, an hour into their spacewalk.
"For the first time since its launch on April 24, 1990, Hubble is without a heartbeat," Mission Control reported.
It was the part of the mission that scientists had feared most.
The failure of a critical system could leave the $2 billion-plus telescope crippled or even useless.
It took the two spacewalkers about 3 hours to remove the old power control unit and plug in the new one.
It was a tedious job requiring 36 connections and made all the more difficult by poor access and a protruding bundle of wires.
Grunsfeld used a long spatula and a specially designed wrench to hook up all 36 connectors on the left side of the new power unit, a long, narrow black box.
"What I need," he said, pausing to take a breath, "is to have talked about this in 1975 and laid out this bay."
"Ashamed to mention it, but I was in high school," astronaut Nancy Currie replied from inside the cockpit.
"Me, too!"
Grunsfeld said.
Grunsfeld was congratulated by his crewmates after the last connector was twisted on. "
Outstanding work," Mission Control radioed.
"That is some tough work with those gloves on."
said it had little choice but to replace Hubble's original power control unit.
The 12-year-old unit had a loose screw that hampered its ability to circulate electricity through the telescope.
If it wasn't replaced, astronomers would have been able to operate only one or two scientific instruments at a time.
In the worst case, some of the telescope's batteries could have overheated, ruptured and wrecked Hubble.
"As with any beloved relative, you're worried about sending them in for bypass surgery or even a heart transplant, but you realize that the risk of not doing it is severe," Hubble project scientist Dave Leckrone said Tuesday.
could not guarantee that all of Hubble's systems would come to life once the new power control unit was plugged in and the telescope turned back on.
But officials said the risk was lower than the potential for failure from the old unit.
The astronauts and ground controllers raced against the clock once Hubble fell silent.
The telescope's systems cannot be without power too long, otherwise they could be damaged by the cold.
During their first spacewalk on Monday, Grunsfeld and Linnehan hung thermal blankets on the telescope where the more sensitive instruments are located to help keep them warm while the power was off.
They installed additional covers Wednesday.
In the minutes following the spacesuit leakage, Mission Control debated whether to postpone the power-unit replacement by a day and have Grunsfeld and Linnehan install an advanced camera, a much shorter job slated for Thursday.
But flight controllers stuck to the original plan, even though it meant for a much longer workday.
Grunsfeld, an astrophysicist, worked on the 43-foot Hubble during the last service call in 1999.
Linnehan is a veterinarian who has operated on elephants, rhinos and whales.
Having given them a writing assignment last week, in which he asked the players to put pen to paper and describe what made them unique, Coach Andy Murray on Saturday presented the Kings with a math problem:
In order to make the playoffs, he told them, they'll have to win 40 of their last 63 games.
That seems like a tall order for a team that has won only five of its first 17, but as Murray pointed out, the Kings won a higher percentage of games during their late-season run last spring, riding a 13-2-5-2 streak into the playoffs.
Asked if it might be more difficult to maintain a high level of play over a longer period, Murray said it shouldn't be.
"I would think, if anything, the more games you have left and a lower winning percentage needed , you should look favorably at that," he said before Saturday night's 4-2 loss to the Detroit Red Wings.
"That's why we mentioned it to the players this morning.
It's an ominous task, winning that many games, but that's how many points you have to have to reach the playoffs ."
The Kings made the playoffs as the seventh-seeded team in the Western Conference with 92 points last season, finishing two points ahead of the Vancouver Canucks and the Phoenix Coyotes.
The Carolina Hurricanes, with 88 points, finished with the worst regular-season record of any of the 16 teams that made the playoffs.
"I think for anybody to think we need less than 93 would be wrong because that's pretty well what it took last year," Murray said, explaining his calculations.
Defenseman Lubomir Visnovsky , scratched four times this season, is finally rounding into form, Murray said.
"We think he's coming on," the coach said of the Slovak, an NHL all-rookie selection last season after scoring 39 points.
"We think he's going to have more impact.
Obviously, the team has to get going a little better, but we think he's played his best hockey of the season in the last three or four games." ...
Rookie defenseman Andreas Lilja , who suffered a knee injury Oct. 13 while on a conditioning assignment with the Kings' American Hockey League team at Manchester, N.H., could be activated in time for Tuesday night's game against the Calgary Flames, Murray said.
Site --Xcel Energy Center, St. Paul.
Radio --KSPN .
Records --Kings 5-10-1-2, Wild 7-8-3-1.Record vs. Wild --0-1.
Update --Backup goaltender Jamie Storr will make his second start for the Kings.
The Wild, last in the Northwest Division, was outshot and mostly outplayed but still defeated the Kings, 4-3, on Oct. 7 at Staples Center, setting the tone for the Kings' struggles.
By Elliott Teaford
Now it gets tougher for the Clippers, who learned Thursday it might be six weeks before backup point guard Keyon Dooling can play again.
Dooling suffered a sprained left ankle during Wednesday's victory over the Chicago Bulls.
The plan, starting tonight against the Toronto Raptors, is to have Earl Boykins play the point in the absence of Dooling as Jeff McInnis' backup.
When Lamar Odom regains his eligibility after serving his league-imposed drug suspension, it will give Coach Alvin Gentry more options.
"I don't know if we can go the whole year playing Jeff for 40 minutes a game," Gentry said.
"There's a good chance Earl will get more minutes.
Every time he's been in there, he's played well for us."
Boykins, who stands 5 feet 5, had a key role Wednesday in the Clippers' victory over the Bulls.
He had nine points and three assists in eight minutes and made three of four free throws when things got tight. .
"It's one of those situations where it's unfortunate what happened to Keyon," Boykins said.
"At the same time, I'm thankful for the opportunity.
Hopefully, as my minutes increase, I'll be more comfortable.
When you know you're going to be playing 14-15 minutes a game, you feel more comfortable."
For what it's worth, the Clippers have no clue as to when Odom can play again.
He was suspended by the league for a minimum of five games Nov. 5 and the team placed him on its suspended list two days later.
Tonight's game will be the Clippers' sixth without Odom, who will be eligible to play Sunday against the New York Knicks at the earliest.
Gentry's gut feeling is that the league will make an announcement about Odom's return early next week.
But he had no inside information to offer since all drug-related suspensions are confidential matters between the league and the player.
Odom also does not know when he'll be reinstated.
Site--Staples Center.
Radio--KXTA .
Records--
Clippers 4-4, Raptors 5-4.
Record vs. Raptors --1-1.
Update--
This is the fifth game in a six-game trip for the Raptors.
The Raptors have won four of the last five against the Clippers.
Tickets-- 462-2849.
A lack of regulation allows firms to control production.
Some want to see the government step in. 
The shortage of vaccines in the United States against smallpox and anthrax is hardly isolated to those once-obscure bioterrorist threats.
This country suffers chronic difficulties in producing even some everyday inoculations. 
The process is plagued by shortages and manufacturing snafus.
Flu shots, for example, will be delayed again this year because one of the four manufacturers has stopped making the vaccine and another is experiencing plant delays. 
A months-long shortage of tetanus vaccine has forced hospitals and doctors to abandon standard 10-year booster shots for adults and even to deny shots to injured patients in some remote areas.
And demand for a new vaccine against such childhood maladies as meningitis has been so great that its manufacturer can't keep up. 
Several other vaccines are produced by only one manufacturer and could disappear with a serious plant malfunction, a failure to meet federal standards or a decision by the producer to withdraw from the market. 
The problem is that vaccine makers have little financial incentive to continue manufacturing because vaccines are relatively inexpensive.
And the companies face plenty of legal liability when patients allege injury.
From their perspective, plants could be better used to make blockbuster drugs. 
"Let's face it, there aren't the profits in vaccines that there are in the baldness drug minoxidil," said Steven Block, advisor to the government on biological warfare issues and a Stanford University biophysicist. 
Critics lament that the federal government has little control over the industry.
Legally, the government cannot require companies to manufacture vaccines, nor can federal officials demand that companies give notice if they want to stop making one. 
Dr. Steven Black, co-director of the Vaccine Study Center at Kaiser Permanente, said vaccine companies should be regulated in the same way as public utilities or banks. 
If the lone maker of tetanus vaccine "decided they could make more money selling rubber ducks tomorrow, they could theoretically stop doing that
and then there would be no one producing tetanus in this country," Black said.
"That doesn't seem appropriate to me." 
For now, doctors and patients confront some serious shortages. 
Rural physicians complain that they have no tetanus vaccines for patients who suffer deep cuts or who step on scraps of metal, said Dr. Bruce Gellin, executive director of the National Network for Immunization Information.
Pulmonologists, he said, have reported they couldn't get flu shots for some patients with weak immune systems. 
"It's not clear that people have been harmed yet by these delays, but the fact that there are spot shortages of these vaccines--and you have to prioritize who gets it--
that's a problem," Gellin said. 
With bioterrorism fears growing by the day, Health and Human Services Secretary Tommy Thompson negotiated a deal with a British company, Acambis, to produce 40 million doses of smallpox vaccine by next summer.
He's also negotiating with other drug companies to expand the government's stockpile to 300 million doses. 
The government had no backup supplies when Wyeth-Lederle Vaccines stopped making tetanus vaccine for adults earlier this year.
Because a second company also made the tetanus vaccine, the government did not deem it necessary to keep any reserves on hand. 
Aventis Pasteur, the remaining tetanus vaccine manufacture, will need several more months to increase its production. 
Government officials acknowledge now that tetanus supply problems could have been prevented. 
"We have to reevaluate," said Dr. Walter Orenstein, director of the National Immunization Program at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
Several other vaccines are likewise made by a single company.
Merck & Co. is the sole producer of measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine, as well as the chickenpox vaccine.
Wyeth-Lederle is the only manufacturer of pneumococcal vaccine for children. 
Neither of the two relatively new vaccines is kept in the government's stockpile. 
According to recent CDC figures, the government keeps only three routine vaccines in its stockpile: 4 million doses of MMR vaccine, 3.6 million doses of polio vaccine and 150,000 doses of pediatric diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus vaccine. 
Several members of Congress and the National Vaccine Advisory Committee are so concerned about the vaccine supply that they are discussing how the government can protect the public from shortages. 
"The government needs to play a bigger role in assuring vaccines by stockpiling them," said Rep. Henry Waxman (D-Los Angeles), who has been actively involved in vaccine supply issues.
But having a federal takeover of vaccine manufacturing "would have to be a last resort," he said. 
Orenstein suggested greater financial incentives be given to drug companies to produce vaccines.
Mass vaccination programs, such as those for childhood diseases, are normally developed under government or World Health Organization contracts that offer very modest profit margins. 
Pharmaceutical companies prefer to focus their efforts on vaccines for more specialized conditions, such as Alzheimer's disease, AIDS and cancer.
If such vaccines can be manufactured, they could be huge moneymakers. 
"Vaccines are not the gift that keeps on giving with respect to pharmaceutical company profits," said Block, the Stanford biophysicist.
"They are interested in selling us a pill that we can take every day for a long period of time." 
In the 1970s and early '80s, most companies left the vaccine business because of liability concerns, leaving most of the market to a few large competitors. 
"With any large-scale vaccination campaign, you know one thing for certain--people will die," Block said.
He was referring, primarily, to the elderly, the very young, or those with weakened immune systems.
But strong and healthy individuals, too, are sometimes harmed by vaccines. 
In response, the federal government established a compensation program for patients who suffer injury.
The program has paid out $1.3 billion since its inception in 1986, removing most liability from the vaccine companies. 
But many new vaccines are not covered in that program, and the program allows civil suits in certain circumstances. 
On top of legal concerns, experts say, some drug companies have been driven out of the vaccine business by more stringent safety standards imposed by the federal government. 
In 1999, the government banned the use of thimerosal, a vaccine preservative containing mercury that possibly has dangerous side effects.
As a result, two of four companies stopped producing childhood diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus vaccine.
A third company has had troubles upgrading its plant. 
Now there is a national shortage of that vital childhood vaccine. 
"We accept a trade-off that there may be glitches in the vaccine supply because now we no longer accept mercury of even the smallest amount as a preservative in vaccines," said Dr. Jerome Klein, a member of the National Vaccine Advisory Committee. 
BioPort Corp., which makes anthrax vaccine, hasn't produced a dose since 1998 because its plant has consistently failed U.S. Food and Drug Administration inspections.
It is trying yet again to receive permission to restart production. 
Even so, some say that the vaccine industry is undergoing a kind of renaissance--at least in the areas of genetic engineering that can lead to lucrative niche products. 
"We've made enormous strides.
The vaccine industry has really been transformed," said Una Ryan, chief executive of Avant Immunotherapeutics Inc. 
The company is creating oral vaccines for affluent travelers who want to be protected against cholera and typhoid when they travel to areas where such diseases are endemic.
Avant is also producing vaccines to improve cholesterol levels. 
Avant recently licensed technology pertaining to a genetically engineered anthrax vaccine to DynPort Vaccine Co., a supplier to the Defense Department.
The vaccine is still being developed. 
"In the areas we have concentrated in, we believe that they are very nice businesses," Ryan said. 
The government, meantime, is doing research of its own.
To deal with bioterrorism, the National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Disease is studying whether a diluted version of the smallpox vaccine would effectively protect individuals in the event that new supplies are not forthcoming. 
Smallpox, caused by a virus, is regarded as much more worrisome than anthrax as a biological weapon, since it is highly contagious, often deadly and has no effective treatment. 
If the research shows that a diluted version provides immunity, "we can expand the current 15.4 million doses to 75 million," said Dr. Anthony Fauci, the institute's director, who added, "We should have an answer by the end of the year.
" 
Some experts have suggested that the push for smallpox and anthrax vaccines have reawakened the public to the benefits of inoculations.
After all, decades have passed since massive outbreaks of smallpox or polio. 
"Until there's a crisis, people forget what the value of these things are in keeping diseases at bay," Dr. Gellin said.  
Times staff writer Marlene Cimons in Washington contributed to this report.
Thousands die around the globe each year in home-grown violence.
But U.S. war isn't likely to target these killers.
The day before last week's slaughter in the United States, a suicide bomber protesting the abysmal state of Turkish prisons set off an explosion in a busy shopping district of Istanbul, killing himself, three other Turks and an Austrian tourist.
As the world was absorbing scenes of horror from the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, three police officers in Londonderry, Northern Ireland, narrowly escaped death when a roadside bomb, apparently planted by Irish Republican Army dissidents, exploded in their path.
In Colombia one night this week, a right-wing paramilitary squad rousted most of the inhabitants of three neighboring villages from their sleep, accused them of collaborating with the country's Marxist guerrillas and opened fire with assault rifles, killing 15.
Thousands of civilians die around the world each year in armed conflicts or politically motivated attacks that the U.S. State Department classifies as terrorism.
But relatively few of the killers are likely to end up in the cross hairs of President Bush's declared war on "every terrorist group of global reach.
"
The United States is gathering support to fight a highly specialized form of terror--a wealthy, mobile, technologically savvy transnational network of groups linked to Osama bin Laden, the Saudi expatriate identified by U.S. officials as the prime suspect in last week's attacks.
Concentrated in the Middle East and Asia, inspired by an extremist interpretation of Islam, these groups have vowed to kill Americans and their allies.
Yet most of the world's terror is local.
It is rooted in narrow conflicts that have little or nothing to do with America.
Millions who live in fear of terrorism around the world are unlikely to breathe easier, specialists on terrorism say, if the United States wins what Bush has called the first war of the 21st century.
Barely noticed by a grieving America, the rest of the world's bloodshed goes on.
It's been business as usual these days for violent separatists, ethnic hate warriors, politically driven kidnappers and the paramilitary thugs who strike back at them, killing civilians in the process.
"Because there is such a variety of conflicts and underlying causes, it would be unrealistic to think that all of them are going to be swept away by a concerted strategy against the international network that carried out these atrocities in America," said Paul Wilkinson, professor of international relations at St. Andrews University in Scotland.
"These battles are going to have to be won by the local governments most under attack."
Yet the blow to America could have a ripple effect, for better or worse, on other countries' battles.
In some conflicts, it has put guerrilla groups that use terror tactics on the defensive.
It has quickened a move to make arrest and search warrants enforceable in all 15 countries of the European Union.
It may give a boost to some peace negotiations while undermining others.
It also may embolden authoritarian governments to rally to America's side and then terrorize their own peaceful critics at home, in the hope that Washington will turn a blind eye.
The U.S. State Department listed 138 "significant terrorist incidents" last year in 29 countries.
They were perpetrated by 43 armed groups, 31 of which are on the department's blacklist, barred from getting money from American citizens.
Few realists believe that last week's attacks will shock many of these warriors into embracing peaceful politics.
"Sometimes terrible things happen to make way for better things," said Adriana Delgado, a political scientist at Javeriana University in Bogota, Colombia.
"The only sensible thing is that the world will understand that this craziness, wherever it started, has no reason to be.
But this is utopian."
The United States may be drawn into new conflicts--and make new enemies--as it goes after Bin Laden's network, but it remains unclear just how far-reaching the mission will be.
Many Islamist groups suspected of loose ties to Bin Laden's network--separatist guerrillas in Indonesia's Aceh province, for example, or the Abu Sayyaf, which specializes in kidnapping in the Philippines--have intensely parochial agendas that in general do not concern America.
The United States is unlikely to directly take on such groups as the Revolutionary United Front, which seeks to topple the government of Sierra Leone and keep control of its diamond mines, or the ETA guerrillas fighting to carve an independent Basque state from northern Spain and southern France.
They are notoriously brutal, but neither has spread its terror beyond those countries' borders.
Yet no Western leader is struggling harder to link his own enemies with America's than Spanish Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar.
"There can be no distinction among terrorists," he said last week.
"They are the main adversary of the world."
A Basque separatist newspaper gave Aznar some ammunition by applauding the destruction of the World Trade Center.
But there are real differences in motivation among groups that practice terror.
Bin Laden's holy war excludes compromise.
Other armed groups, including the ETA--an acronym for Basque Homeland and Freedom--have civilian constituencies and often feel moral constraints.
They rarely go for mass slaughter and--with the exception of some fanatics in Turkey, the Middle East and Sri Lanka--do not carry out suicide attacks.
Most guerrillas, like the governments they fight, calibrate violence to seek advantage in negotiations over local disputes.
Even so, the violence in America has put some armed insurgents on the defensive.
Danny Morrison, a former IRA prisoner, felt compelled to declare in a radio interview this week that his group "by and large made attempts to issue warnings before bomb attacks.
" The IRA has joined other guerrilla groups in condemning the suicide hijackings in America.
America's tragedy has radically altered the climate in the Middle East, prompting Israeli and Palestinian leaders to order a pullback from their yearlong bloody conflict.
To a lesser extent, it has added to outside pressure for disarmament in Northern Ireland and Macedonia to end guerrilla conflicts there.
IRA inaction on handing over weapons has impeded Northern Ireland's 1998 peace accord, but now the group may be forced to yield.
Since the U.S. attacks, the Bush administration has hardened its attitude toward the IRA's political wing, Sinn Fein, over the arrests last month of three IRA terrorist suspects in Colombia, where they were allegedly collaborating with Marxist guerrillas.
Protestant politicians in the British province are demanding that the United States ban Sinn Fein's fund-raising in America.
In Macedonia, North Atlantic Treaty Organization troops are collecting guns from ethnic Albanian rebels under a recent cease-fire accord.
After the attacks in America, NATO Secretary-General George Robertson called the effort "a tiny ray of sunshine . . .
that might break the blackness of this terrible week."
Since fighting started earlier this year, Macedonia's ethnic Slav leaders have pressed Washington to side with them against ethnic Albanian "terrorists."
Now the Macedonians believe that a U.S. war on global terrorism will weaken the Albanian rebels, whom they say get help from Bin Laden's network.
But there is also concern in Macedonia that the United States, focused more on the threat to itself, "will not be involved in the way that it was involved until now" and that the Balkan region's latest hot spot will flare anew, said Iso Rusi, a political analyst.
In Colombia, where the United States has invested $1.3 billion in a war on drugs, some fear the opposite: that the U.S. will take a more militaristic approach and undermine the Colombian government's peace talks with guerrillas, who control a swath of territory used for coca production.
Seeking U.S. help to crush armed foes at home, national rulers in Asia and Africa have rushed to pledge support for a wounded America.
The latest was Indonesian President Megawati Sukarnoputri, who met with Bush on Wednesday.
Bush promised to ask Congress to ease a ban on funding for Indonesia's armed forces, whose brutal police actions in East Timor and elsewhere have fueled violent rebellion in the world's most populous Muslim country.
In Algeria, a Muslim country embroiled in a conflict with massive human rights violations on both sides, the authoritarian government is seeking sophisticated U.S. military hardware, including night-vision equipment, to aid its fight against Islamist extremists.
South Africa wants the FBI and Britain's Scotland Yard to help stop a 3-year-old terror campaign in Cape Town, which it blames on an Islamist-allied group called People Against Gangsterism and Drugs.
It remains to be seen whether the United States, spread thin as a world policeman, can help.
With counterinsurgency training missions in 55 countries, Washington may have to retrench to fight its own battles.
Also, previous U.S. administrations have been reluctant to aid many of these supplicants because of their dismal human rights records.
Some strong-arm governments are seeking moral support, not material aid, from Washington as they get tougher at home.
China, India, Sri Lanka, Turkey, Russia and Uzbekistan hope the United States will simply not condemn their crackdowns on violent separatists, home-grown guerrillas and unarmed dissidents.
Sri Lankan President Chandrika Kumaratunga, partially blinded by a separatist suicide bomber in 1999, is especially vocal these days.
Often criticized by the West for her country's human rights abuses, she now says the attacks on America have given the "so-called superpower" a "wake-up call to end its double standard on terrorism."
The expectation that Washington will be more tolerant of harsh anti-terror tactics abroad filters down to ordinary citizens in violence-plagued countries.
"When our women and children were being killed, the West did nothing," said Sebnem Ozsuer, an accountant in Ankara, Turkey, recalling the worst years of separatist conflict in the country's predominantly Kurdish southeastern provinces.
"The West called those terrorists freedom fighters.
But now that their own freedom is under attack, they may understand us better."
Reed Brody, advocacy director for Human Rights Watch in New York, said Bush's signaling of a U.S. foreign policy geared toward fighting terrorism could sweep away concerns about civil liberties abroad and lead to more atrocities on both sides of armed conflicts.
"Around the world, this is something that worries us, not just for moral reasons," Brody said.
"Indiscriminate killings do nothing to eliminate terrorism.
If anything, it is going to create a backlash and breed more terrorism."
Protests: Violence erupts at a rally against a plan to cut ranks at ground zero.
It mars the camaraderie among officers who have suffered together.
In a violent confrontation that revealed the explosive tensions simmering in the city, several hundred firefighters clashed with police officers at the World Trade Center site Friday, protesting plans to reduce the number of firefighters who retrieve human remains from the wreckage.
Five police officers were injured and 12 firefighters--including a captain, a marshal and three top fire union officials--were arrested in the melee, which shattered the image of solidarity between New York police officers and firefighters.
The march, which began peacefully at midmorning, turned violent when demonstrators near the 17-acre site broke through barricades and began scuffling with officers.
They briefly occupied the epicenter, recited the Lord's Prayer over the still-smoldering ruins, and then shook hands with groups of stunned construction workers.
Minutes later the crowd marched to City Hall, where police in riot gear and officers on horseback ringed the building.
The demonstrators finally dispersed, shouting, "We want dignity!
Bring the bodies home!"
They said the city was trying to turn the excavation into a "scoop and dump" operation, more to remove debris than to find bodies.
The shocking clash drew a heated response from Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who blasted the organizers for misleading firefighters into believing that the city no longer cared about recovering human remains.
Yet he seemed equally saddened by the unexpected violence between New York City police officers and firefighters, who have presented a united front of camaraderie to the world.
"Emotions are very high in this city," he said at a news conference. "
But the conduct displayed today is unacceptable.
You can't hit police officers.
For that you go to jail.
You have to obey the law, no matter how much you feel like crying and venting your emotions at this time."
Fire union officials fired back, charging that police officers had provoked much of the violence at a march that was intended to be peaceful.
They said the demonstration was launched by firefighters, who suffered extensive losses Sept. 11, and not by the union.
City officials "are lying when they say firefighters attacked police," said Peter Gorman, president of the Uniformed Fire Officers Assn.
"We were marching peacefully to ground zero when suddenly a handful of police officers waded into a line of marchers and began pulling people out.
"Was there scuffling and name-calling?
Absolutely, and I regret that.
But the mayor wasn't there, and now he's libeling firefighters and excusing police misconduct by a small group of policemen.
It's just plain wrong."
Police said further arrests may be made after officials have a chance to review videotapes of the confrontation.
Fire Commissioner Thomas Von Essen joined with Police Commissioner Bernard Kerik in condemning the violence.
At the heart of the dispute is a new plan announced by city officials that would reduce the number of police, fire and emergency crew "spotters"--those who pinpoint possible human remains in the wreckage--at the World Trade Center site.
Whenever they identify such remains, which continue to be taken out of the ruins, construction crews halt their work and special rescue teams remove the remains.
Debris that does not contain remains is carted away in trucks to the Fresh Kills landfill on Staten Island.
The Fire Department lost an estimated 353 people in the attacks, of whom 250 are still missing.
Estimates of the total number of people missing range was "occasioned by the fact that some local prosecutors and judges have grotesquely perverted the intent of the voters who thought the three-strikes law would be focused on dangerous offenders rather than on minor offenders.
"
The state law, enacted in the aftermath of several highly publicized violent killings by repeat offenders, has had a dramatic impact on the state's criminal justice system.
By May 2001, more than 6,700 individuals had received 25-years-to-life terms, while 43,000 more had been handed significantly enhanced sentences for second strike offenses.
Although more than two dozen states enacted three-strikes-style repeat offender statutes since 1993, none of them has utilized their statute even remotely as often as California.
The law has been controversial since its passage, with even some of the original proponents saying it was being used improperly to impose draconian sentences on individuals for minor crimes.
In one highly publicized case, a man was sentenced to 25 years to life for stealing pizza in Redondo Beach.
A judge later reduced the term to six years.
Judges have had some leeway in sentencing since a California Supreme Court ruling in 1996 granted them power to overlook prior convictions.
Judges also have the option of rejecting earlier offenses prosecutors seek to use as first and second strikes.
Support for the law remains solid in the state Legislature.
Earlier this year, Assemblywoman Jackie Goldberg (D-Los Angeles) introduced a bill that would have required the third strike to be a violent or otherwise "very serious" felony.
"I was unable to get that bill out of the Assembly Judiciary Committee," she said Friday.
Goldberg said.
"But the punishment should fit the crime."
The case that led to Friday's ruling started on Nov. 4, 1995, when Andrade was caught leaving a Kmart in Ontario with five videotapes worth $84.70 stuffed in his pants.
Two weeks later, Andrade was caught shoplifting four more videos, worth $68.84, from another Kmart in Montclair.
Subsequently, the San Bernardino County district attorney's office charged Andrade under the three-strikes law.
Andrade, then 37, is a longtime heroin addict with a history of convictions for nonviolent offenses, including petty theft, burglary and parole violation.
All told, according to Friday's decision, he had been convicted of five felonies and two misdemeanors before the video thefts.
Andrade was convicted of the two thefts--both charged under the three-strikes law with possible terms of 25 years to life.
Under the state's repeat-offender statute, the trial judge, Joan Borba of Rancho Cucamonga, was required to impose the terms consecutively, meaning that Andrade would be required to serve 50 years--with no possibility of parole.
That meant he would be 87 when he was eligible for release.
In the opinion Friday, Judge Paez noted that a 37-year-old man had a life expectancy of another 40 years.
That meant that Andrade was likely to die in prison and that the sentence was the equivalent of a life term.
"Andrade's indeterminate sentence of 50 years to life is exceeded in California only by first-degree murder and a select few violent crimes," Paez wrote in explaining why he thought the sentence was "grossly disproportionate" to the offense.
Paez, whose opinion was joined by Mary M. Schroeder, the circuit's chief judge, said Andrade's case was similar to to one in 1983 in which the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that a South Dakota court had violated the 8th Amendment for sentencing to life without the possibility of parole a seven-time nonviolent recidivist who had written a $100 check while having no funds in th from 2,400 to nearly 5,000.
City engineering officials have said it may take a year before the full 1.2 million tons of debris are removed.
For weeks, fire and police spotters have roamed the area freely.
But the work has been complicated by the fact that fires from the attacks are still burning underground.
In recent weeks, construction crews have discovered red-hot steel beams just beneath the surface.
On occasion, they have said, sudden shifts of material caused massive cave-ins and other threats to people who have been walking through the sprawling debris pile every day.
High-ranking fire officials have also said there may be hazardous air quality at the site, although no definitive conclusions have been reached by federal or city environmental officials.
Giuliani said city engineering experts had told him that the site remains physically dangerous and that too many police and fire spotters, more than 200, had been roaming the area.
In recent weeks, he noted, there were several "near misses."
A huge crane almost hit a firefighter in the head, he said, and several spotters working just below the surface were almost run over by a large truck.
The risk of further injury, he added, was "very real."
"This is a crime scene, it's a disaster area, it's a burial ground," he said.
"It has to be handled with professionalism and safety and dignity."
The new plan, revealed earlier this week, calls for no more than 75 spotters to be in the area at any given time.
The news sparked a furious response from firefighters, who brushed aside the arguments about safety.
They vowed to mount future demonstrations--with thousands of people in the streets next time--if the city does not change its new staffing plan.
Union officials called the attack site sacred ground, "a place very much like Pearl Harbor," said Michael Carter, vice president of the Uniformed Firefighters Assn.
Carter was arrested at the demonstration, along with Vice President Jack Ginty and Steve Carbone, the union's secretary.
Firefighters and Giuliani, however, blasted published reports that some firefighters and police officers were trying to run up overtime hours at the site so they could pad their paychecks and reach retirement earlier.
"Cutting the number of firefighters at the site is like telling people that the city is turning this into a scoop and dump operation--like they were just cleaning it up now," said firefighter Bob McGuire, who helped lead protesters to City Hall after the demonstration at ground zero.
Others shook their fists at City Hall, demanding that Giuliani and Von Essen address them.
The crowd eventually quieted down and sang "God Bless America" before union organizers and police urged people to leave.
As they waved signs in protest and walked away from City Hall, demonstrators conceded that the explosive protest was as much about their frustration and anger as the debate over excavation and removal.
The last six to seven weeks have been "terrible, unbearable for us," said fire union official Rudy San Filippo.
"We've lost so much.
We never expected to see this kind of devastation, this big human tragedy take place in New York City."
As he watched the unruly crowd, a young police officer in riot gear shook his head and said he too could not believe what he was seeing.
"We really don't need this," said the officer, one of many protecting City Hall against its own firefighters.
"Not in New York.
Not now."
On the other hand, Paez wrote, Andrade's case was different from the last major cruel and unusual punishment ruling issued by the Supreme Court in 1991.
In that instance, the high court held that it was not a violation of the 8th Amendment for Michigan courts to impose a life sentence on a man for possessing more than 650 grams of cocaine.
In the decade since that ruling was issued, there has been only one instance in which a federal court has struck down a sentence on 8th Amendment grounds, according to the dissent issued Friday by Judge Joseph T. Sneed, who said the majority had failed to apply the reasoning of the 1991 decision--Harmelin v. Michigan.
Sneed contended that the 9th Circuit had failed to give proper deference to the Legislature and California voters, who overwhelmingly enacted the three-strikes law in 1994.
"We must accord great deference to state-mandated sentences," Sneed wrote.
"We should not employ our power to strike down a sentence as unduly harsh when its primary purpose is the incapacitation of a habitual criminal offender."
In its accelerated pursuit of suspected super-terrorist Osama Bin Laden, the United States is prepared to use its full panoply of high-tech tools: Spy satellites.
Communication intercepts.
Long-range weaponry.
Perhaps even "cyber-war" attacks on his financial infrastructure.
Already, the United States has fired cruise missiles at sites linked to Bin Laden in retaliation for the bombings of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
Intelligence officials have used advanced surveillance techniques to monitor his conversations and track the movements of his followers.
Even before the Aug. 7 embassy bombings, they reportedly drew up plans to send U.S. forces to Afghanistan to extricate Bin Laden, but the proposal eventually was rejected.
Yet Bin Laden, the Islamic extremist accused of masterminding not only the embassy attacks but other acts of terrorism from a command post in the Afghan mountains, appears to have a potent defense against the world's most fully equipped modern power, U.S. officials acknowledge.
He can simply retreat into the Stone Age.
U.S. officials fear Bin Laden has the ability to neutralize much of his pursuers' advantage by burrowing deeper into the jagged Afghan landscape, limiting his use of vulnerable communication links and demobilizing an already loose-jointed 5,000-member organization to minimize the damage that might be done to it by informants or military assault.
Such maneuvers would sharply hinder the efficiency of Bin Laden's organization.
Yet they would have only a modest effect on its ability to carry out what U.S. officials characterize as a very low-tech, albeit lethal, mission--to bomb and harass Americans and other foes.
U.S. authorities have claimed early success in their pursuit of Bin Laden, with the apprehension of several key suspects in the embassy bombings.
But Bin Laden's apparent ability to adopt a primitive survival strategy raises questions about whether the United States--in this anti-terror campaign and those that are likely to follow--truly has the punitive power it claimed last month when it let fly the 79 cruise missiles of "Operation Infinite Reach.
"
"If they fight us in this century, it's no contest," one defense official said.
"But if they turn back the time machine, they can make the odds a lot different."
In the run-up to last month's attack on targets in Afghanistan and Sudan, U.S. officials used Bin Laden's sporadic public appearances, and his reliance on high-tech tools, to their advantage.
The United States had accumulated valuable intelligence on Bin Laden using spy satellite photos of his "terrorist university," which the officials showed off when they briefed the public after the attack.
They used their communications intercept capacity to pick up calls placed by Bin Laden on his Inmarsat satellite phone, despite his apparent use of electronic "scramblers."
Bin Laden's voiceprint, which can be used to identify his phone calls, is widely available because of interviews he has given on television.
The Saudi-born financier has appeared to relish visibility, as underscored by past interviews and a public statement he issued after the U.S. attack.
Such appearances clearly have a purpose: They keep his far-flung operatives and potential volunteers aware of his presence and keep them focused on the cause of anti-Western fundamentalism.
But now, Bin Laden can quickly scale back reliance on satellite phones and the laptop computer
he is believed to use.
He can rely more heavily on emissaries to convey personal messages and turn to lesser-known aides to issue public pronouncements.
In bombing an alleged training camp in Afghanistan, Clinton administration officials said they wanted to disrupt a facility that was instructing as many as 600 fighters at a time in the use of firearms and explosives, as well as serve notice on Bin Laden that the West is watching him.
Reports from the region suggest that Bin Laden wants to simply rebuild the camps, with stepped-up security.
But officials acknowledge that if he decided the risks have become too great, he could quickly move out and relocate some of the most important camp functions to caves or underground bunkers.
And he also could break up his organization into smaller groups and disperse them in the mountains.
Reported
Training Called 'Low-Tech' In the network of camps, Bin Laden is not protected by the kind of multistory reinforced underground bunkers that Iraqi President Saddam Hussein has built to protect his staff and command and control communications, one U.S. official noted.
But "he doesn't need it like you do in downtown Baghdad. . . .
The Russians tried to blast Afghan fighters out of those hills for years, and they couldn't do it," the official said.
The explosives and firearms training allegedly given to Bin Laden's warriors, and most of the group's communications, "are all basically very low-tech," said Kenneth Katzman, a Middle East expert and former CIA official at the Congressional Research Service.
The instructors "don't need some big layout to teach people how it's done."
The rudimentary organizational structure that Bin Laden's network has been described as having could also frustrate efforts to bring him to justice.
Military organizations and even drug gangs must rely on closely knit hierarchies to keep daily operations going.
Bin Laden's alleged network is apparently far looser, composed of some members who belong to other terrorist groups and others with weaker affiliations.
They are said to get money from Bin Laden, but many apparently get little or nothing in the way of detailed operational orders.
Bin Laden's inner circle may be quite small, consisting of perhaps no more than a handful of warriors with assault rifles who are regularly on the move, some analysts believe.
"This is an ad hoc, hydra-headed organization," Katzman said.
"They can melt into the mountains, they can do nothing for a while, and it doesn't hurt the cause."
Clearly, one of Bin Laden's greatest vulnerabilities is his widespread network of businesses and investments, which consist of legitimate ventures and, according to some reports, criminal enterprises, such as Afghan drug-running.
Bin Laden can't neglect these businesses, because he needs the revenues they generate to maintain his authority in the world of radical Islam.
But analysts say he can lower his risks by conducting transactions in an ancient style, with wads of cash carried by intermediaries, known as "cutouts" in intelligence parlance.
He would probably be able to maintain operations even if some parts of his empire were cut off, since the terrorist activities he allegedly sponsors are relatively inexpensive.
While the U.S. government spent $80 million on the cruise missiles alone, the Aug. 7 embassy attacks that killed hundreds probably cost only several hundred thousand dollars to execute, analysts say.
Even so, U.S. officials say they have many tactical weapons they can deploy against Bin Laden.
If cruise missile strikes won't work as well next time against a more alert, more hidden foe, the United States may be able to penetrate his network by going after the individuals in some of its cells.
Authorities may now have valuable leads provided from key suspects captured after last month's bombings.
These officials doubt that Bin Laden will maintain a low profile, and they say he may attempt more attacks that would make him vulnerable.
The United States hopes to enlist Afghanistan's ruling Taliban militia, which has mixed feelings about Bin Laden, and the Pakistani government in the effort to bring him to justice.
With the United States investing huge resources and assigning top priority to the case, some experts predict it is only a matter of time before Bin Laden is run to ground.
Eventually, U.S. officials were able to nab Mir Aimal Kasi, the Pakistani who gunned down employees outside CIA headquarters, and
Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, the mastermind behind the World Trade Center bombing, analysts say.
Yet one U.S. official remains cautious in predicting success for the effort.
"He has a lot of operatives in a lot of places, and he is not an easy target," this official said.
Some outside analysts say authorities will need more favorable breaks to bring this case to a successful conclusion.
Despite the missile mission's code name of "Operation Infinite Reach," said Andrew F. Krepinevich of the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, a Washington think tank, "this may be a case of reach exceeding grasp."
These anxious fall days may be remembered as the moment when the full costs of the war against terrorism began to snap into focus.
Individually, the changes now underway in agencies across Washington are remarkable.
Cumulatively, they are virtually unprecedented.
Individually, the changes now underway in agencies across Washington are remarkable.
Cumulatively, they are virtually unprecedented.
George Herbert Walker Bush won the war and lost the peace.
His son, President George W. Bush, appears determined to avoid the same mistake--if he possibly can.
That will probably be a much greater challenge than it looks today, even as the bombs begin falling in Afghanistan.
All indications are that President Bush is patiently and deliberately considering his military and diplomatic responses to the terrorist attacks on New York and the Pentagon.
Timing, like most subtle political skills, has never been Al Gore's strength.
But whether by luck or design, Gore now may be approaching a harmonious convergence of moment and messenger.
How he handles that opportunity could reveal much about the way Gore will position himself against President Bush in the coming months--and even in a potential 2004 rematch.
It was the South William Faulkner had in mind when he said the past is never behind us--it is never even past.
But he might just as well have been speaking about Washington.
Philadelphia is to weeds as Kansas is to corn.
In large sections of North Philadelphia, the weeds appear intent on reclaiming land the Colonists settled hundreds of years ago.
Weeds poke through the sidewalk, twirl through the charred hulks of abandoned homes and factories and ascend, in creepy majesty, to towering heights as weed trees (that's what the city maintenance workers call them) in the vacant lots that pockmark seemingly every other street.
Afghanistan: U.S. Special Forces did not find Mullah Mohammed Omar but gathered vital intelligence, say officials, who hint that covert missions also took place. 
An early-morning assault Saturday by American ground forces in southern Afghanistan targeted the home of the ruling Taliban's leader as well as a military airfield, U.S. officials said, characterizing it as the first of many raids designed to decimate terrorist networks. 
More than 100 Army Rangers and other U.S. commandos participating in the operation parachuted into a Taliban leadership complex near the southern Afghan city of Kandahar and an airfield some distance away, said Gen. Richard B. Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. 
Officials suggested that the raids were not the only missions conducted and that covert operations against undisclosed targets also took place.
Small special operations teams from the United States and Britain have been conducting surveillance and intelligence work in Afghanistan for weeks, officials said.
But Saturday's operations were the first commando raids in the campaign, they said. 
Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostum, an Uzbek warlord in northern Afghanistan, confirmed last week that at least eight U.S. soldiers have been with his troops as they fight to seize the strategic northern city of Mazar-i-Sharif. 
But the Americans have been discussing food aid for the drought-stricken area, Dostum told reporters from his base in Dara-i-Suf, about 55 miles southeast of Mazar-i-Sharif. 
U.S. bombing of the Central Asian nation continued at a fierce pace after Saturday's raid, defense officials said.
The sorties involved more than 100 Navy strike aircraft, several Air Force bombers and a few Air Force fighter-bombers. 
In Shanghai, at a meeting of Pacific Rim leaders, President Bush said the military campaign is "encircling" the militants of Osama bin Laden's Al Qaeda terrorist network and making good progress in destroying their hide-outs.
He also asserted that the defenses of the Taliban are being dismantled. 
Bush warned, however, that the war on terrorism will include "moments of sacrifice." 
The complex targeted in Saturday's raid is one of several residences used by Mullah Mohammed Omar, leader of the Islamic fundamentalist regime.
Although Omar and other Taliban officials were not there when U.S. forces arrived, the mission was considered a success, Myers said. 
A senior Taliban leader, Amir Khan Muttaqi, told the pan-Arab TV network Al Jazeera that the regime's fighters had driven off the Americans and that "this commando attack has failed." 
Saturday's operations produced the first U.S. combat fatalities since the military operation began Oct. 7.
Two soldiers died, and three were injured, when a U.S. Black Hawk helicopter preparing for search-and-rescue duty crashed near its base in neighboring Pakistan, Myers said.
Reports from the area said the crash occurred 15 miles across the border near the Pakistani nuclear test site at Chagai, about 30 miles north of a civil aviation airport at Dalbandin.
A limited number of American troops is based at Dalbandin.
In addition, three U.S. commandos involved in the raids suffered minor injuries as they parachuted to the ground. 
Defense officials are still investigating the cause of the helicopter crash, but Myers said the Black Hawk was not shot down and did not collide with another aircraft or vehicle. 
The commandos destroyed a cache of weapons at the Taliban leadership site, including rocket-propelled grenade launchers and machine guns, defense officials said, and gathered what the officials believe is critical intelligence.
About the same time, other Special Forces members swooped down on a Taliban airfield "a considerable distance" southwest of Kandahar, one defense official said. 
American troops battled Taliban fighters at both sites, inflicting an undetermined number of casualties on the Afghan forces, U.S. officials said. 
Defense officials said the Special Forces were hustled out of the area within a few hours, but not before leaving behind what might be characterized as combat calling cards: photographs of firefighters planting an American flag in the rubble of the World Trade Center and draping a flag over the wrecked side of the Pentagon.
Printed on the photos were the words "Freedom Endures." 
The identities of the two soldiers killed in the helicopter crash were being withheld Saturday until relatives were notified.
Myers said heavy dust clouds created by the chopper's blades during landing probably led to the crash. 
Myers would not say precisely where the helicopter was based.
About 250 Marines are stationed at a Pakistani base in Jacobabad, about 300 miles southeast of Kandahar, for search-and-rescue missions. 
Despite the deaths of the soldiers, Myers said the mission was considered a success because the commandos "attacked and destroyed targets associated with terrorist activity and Taliban command and control." 
Myers said an undetermined number of Taliban forces was killed or injured.
He would not say whether U.S. forces took any prisoners. 
No reporters were present to observe the raids.
The Pentagon contends that media coverage could undermine such missions. 
Video clips taken by military personnel and shown to reporters Saturday depicted Rangers outfitting themselves for the mission in the desert-hued camouflage, strapping on packs loaded with more than 100 pounds of weapons and other gear, and parachuting onto the airfield.
It was not possible to discern any details of the operation from the footage. 
Myers said some details will be kept secret because they could help the Taliban anticipate how future ground attacks will be carried out. 
Officials said the Rangers parachuted onto the airfield from an MC-130E Combat Talon, a special operations aircraft designed to fly nighttime troop delivery missions at low altitudes below enemy radar.
It was not clear how the Rangers got to their second target, the residence and command compound closer to Kandahar.
Myers said various aircraft were used in the mission, but he would not be specific. 
U.S. warplanes had already struck other residences of Omar during two weeks of bombing, but Myers said the target of Saturday's raid had not been attacked before.
He said U.S. officials were not surprised that the Taliban leader wasn't there. 
Military officials said the operation began a few hours after the Muslim holy day came to a close.
It was preceded by a day of intense bombing that pounded 18 targets, including airfields, air defense facilities, ammunition depots and military training sites.
At one target, defense officials believe, their laser-guided bombs destroyed a number of Taliban surface-to-surface missiles. 
Myers refused to say whether U.S. forces remained in control of the airfield after Saturday's raid or whether the troops who carried out the raids were still in Afghanistan. 
"They are now refitting and relocating for potential future operations against terrorist targets and other areas known to harbor terrorists," he said.  
Times staff writers Robin Wright and Edwin Chen in Shanghai, Rone Tempest and Tyler Marshall in Islamabad, Pakistan, and Paul Watson in Wollayet, Afghanistan, contributed to this report.
Trace amounts of anthrax have been found in the offices of three more U.S. senators, bringing to 11 the number of senators' suites found in recent days to be contaminated.
All 11 are in the Hart Senate Office Building, where an anthrax-filled letter was opened Oct. 15 in the office of Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D.
The amounts found were small enough that federal officials are not recommending antibiotic treatment for people who worked in or visited the offices-- as they did for people in Daschle's suite.
"There is no health risk," said Lt. Dan Nichols, spokesman for the U.S. Capitol Police.
David Sandretti, press secretary for Sen. Barbara Boxer, D-Calif., said anthrax traces were found on a table in the senator's mail room.
FBI officials notified her staff of the discovery Sunday night and said that investigators did not believe the traces were the result of a contaminated letter being sent directly to Boxer.
Instead, Sandretti said, they seemed to be the result of cross-contamination from another letter.
Boxer's office is in the same wing of the Hart building as Daschle's, an area considered at the highest risk for exposure because it shares a ventilation system with the area where the anthrax-filled letter was opened.
Sens.
Jon Corzine, D-N.J., and Richard G. Lugar, R-Ind., were also notified Sunday night that anthrax traces were found in their offices.
The Hart building has been closed for business since Oct. 17.
Senators and their staffs have been working out of temporary offices scattered around the Capitol complex.
Congressional officials have yet to decide how to decontaminate the building.
That decision may be complicated because anthrax traces have been discovered in so many different locations in the building.
Corzine's office, for example, is not in the same quadrant as Daschle's.
Statement: Apparently speaking before U.S. airstrikes
, he casts his actions as a response to Mideast conflict.
On the eve of his intended destruction, he surfaced again--gaunt, glaring, angry--and promising a nightmare that will not fade.
Only two and a half hours after the U.S. launched its attack on Afghanistan's ruling Taliban militia and on bases of his Al Qaeda network, Osama bin Laden appeared on millions of television screens throughout the world.
From an undisclosed location, Bin Laden spoke for several minutes on a videotape broadcast by Al Jazeera, the CNN-like Arab news network based on this barren peninsula jutting into the Persian Gulf.
The speech was brief, unapologetic and inflammatory.
Bin Laden renewed his call for a jihad, or holy war, against America.
And he took a new tack by casting his actions as a response to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Previously, Al Qaeda has made little mention of the Palestinian uprising.
The new approach appears to be an effort to tap into widespread and deep sympathy for the Palestinians throughout the Muslim world.
"These events have divided the whole world into two sides.
The side of believers and the side of infidels," he said.
Al Jazeera officials said their correspondent in Kabul was given the tape Sunday by a representative of Bin Laden, though the exact time of delivery was unclear.
They said they were unsure when it was taped, though they believed it might have been "two or three days" before the airstrikes.
They said they had no idea whether Bin Laden had planned to deliver the tape as a show of defiance.
They described its delivery on the day of the bombings as a "coincidence."
The tape was aired soon after it was received, station officials said.
In Washington, White House Press Secretary Ari Fleischer scoffed at the tape and noted that it appeared to have been made in daylight.
The bombings began at night.
"Obviously, it was taped way in advance of this action," he said.
"Obviously, it was put out for the purpose of giving people the impression that Osama bin Laden was speaking after the attack."
A U.S. national security official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said, "We figure it probably was done a couple of days ago for release if
and when any action was taken.
"
Al Jazeera has been accused by Arab nations as well as the U.S. of showing inflammatory footage of the intifada, the year-old conflict between Israelis and Palestinians.
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell recently asked the network's owner, the ruler of Qatar, to "tone down" the coverage.
"There was someone in the Osama bin Laden network that just delivered it.
He had no idea when we would broadcast it," said one person in the newsroom, who declined to be identified.
Al Jazeera has broadcast several interviews with Bin Laden and in recent days has claimed an exclusive link with Al Qaeda.
No matter what the case, the tape was a public relations coup: It showed Bin Laden's ability to escape the dragnet that has surrounded him for weeks, and it competed for air time with footage of the U.S. attack.
During the broadcast, Bin Laden spoke slowly into a microphone in front of what appeared to be a rocky outcropping, a rifle by his side.
He praised those who attacked the United States on Sept. 11 that left nearly 5,600 missing or dead.
Bin Laden was flanked by several men, including Ayman Zawahiri, who is thought to be his top aide.
"There is America, hit by God in one of its softest spots.
Its greatest buildings were destroyed, thank God for that.
There is America, full of fear from its north to its south, from its west to its east.
Thank God for that," Bin Laden said.
"What America is tasting now is something insignificant compared to what we have tasted for scores of years."
He also accused the world's "infidel" nations of having a double standard by expressing outrage at the terrorist attacks against the West while ignoring Muslims killed in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict or those who have died after the U.S. imposed sanctions against Iraq.
The United States, he said, had committed far worse crimes, such as the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
Most chillingly, Bin Laden seemed to imply more terrorism is to come.
"To America, I say only a few words to it and its people: I swear to God that America will not live in peace before peace reigns in Palestine, and before all the army of infidels depart the land of Muhammad, peace be upon him," he said.
The tape was revealing in several ways.
First, Bin Laden, who has long been rumored to suffer from kidney disease, looked much thinner than he did in the last accurately dated tape of him, taken in January on the occasion of his son's wedding.
Second, he was preceded on the tape by Zawahiri, an Egyptian doctor who some suspect may secretly run the network.
Zawahiri is the former leader of the Egyptian Islamic Jihad, which has terrorized Egypt's leaders for nearly three decades.
Finally, both Zawahiri and Bin Laden linked their actions to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
Previously, they had invoked their jihad by reference to supposedly corrupt Arab governments and the U.S. presence in Muslim countries.
"We cannot accept that Palestine will become Jewish," Zawahiri said.
"This is a new battle, like the battle for Jerusalem."
But the speech may have negative repercussions, according to some Islamic experts who viewed the broadcast.
Mohammad Sayed Said, a political scientist in Cairo, said that during the broadcast, Bin Laden "implicitly but strongly" admitted his guilt in the Sept. 11 attacks.
That "may really backfire," Said said.
"People will think this is a confession of sorts and see it with revulsion."
Those who learned of the airstrikes Sunday night expressed far more fear about the spread of the conflict than the prospect of joining it.
Khalid bin Jabor al Thani, a former government health official and member of Qatar's ruling family, was relaxing with friends in a coffee shop when he learned of the bombing.
Thani said he was most worried about what would happen within Muslim countries once word spread of the Afghanistan attack.
"The whole thing is a big mess," Thani said.
"The aftermath will have repercussions.
It will have a ripple effect."
Thani doubted that many Muslims would jump to heed Bin Laden's call to join a holy war.
"We are afraid these things might spill over," he said.   
Times staff writers Michael Slackman in Amman, Jordan, and Bob Drogin in Washington contributed to this report.
Cancellations: Citing security concerns, world and national organizations postpone high-profile meetings.
For more than half a century--through wars and famines and other world crises--the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank convened their annual meetings without fail.
Even massive protests against the groups in recent years did not prevent the economic leaders of 183 member nations from coming together to discuss development, lending and reducing poverty.
But this year, for the first time in their existence, the organizations canceled sessions scheduled for next week in Washington because of the terrorist attacks on America.
The meetings, which were expected to draw 15,000 participants and several times that many demonstrators to Washington, were among scores of conferences, conventions and other events canceled or postponed by governments, business and organizations because of concerns about security and out of deference to the victims and their loved ones.
It remained unclear how long the events of Sept. 11 would interfere with schedules and planning not only in Washington, but across the nation.
The U.N. General Assembly's annual session of world leaders in New York, the annual gala of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus Institute in Washington and the California Dental Assn.
convention in San Francisco were among the many events that have been called off or postponed.
Top U.S. officials' travel plans were scuttled or in flux.
President Bush canceled plans to travel to Texas for business and pleasure over the next several days, and his two-week maiden journey through Asia scheduled for next month seems in doubt.
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld scrapped plans to attend a NATO defense ministers meeting in Naples, Italy, next week and is sending his deputy, Paul D. Wolfowitz, in his place.
And candidates for governor in New Jersey and Virginia, mayor in New York and other elected offices have done the unthinkable this close to an election: They have stopped campaigning.
The prime reason for the cancellations of the IMF and World Bank meetings and the U.N. General Assembly meeting was a desire not to further strain the already overtaxed police and Secret Service, several officials said.
"It was clear that the U.S. government was going to be extremely occupied with security issues of their own," IMF spokesman William Murray said.
"It would be extremely insensitive if we continued to press for U.S. authorities to provide security for our meetings."
With predictions that as many as 100,000 protesters would flock to Washington for the meetings, large numbers of police officers and Secret Service personnel would have been required.
Most of the demonstrations were called off even before the IMF and World Bank decision, according to Mobilization for Global Justice, one of the organizers.
"We have a sense of humility about this moment.
It's not an appropriate time to be mobilizing people in the way we had planned," said Robert Weissman, an organizer for the group.
But another group, International Action Center, has decided to take advantage of its planning.
It has called its regional offices across the country and directed them to keep the buses full of protesters coming to Washington on Sept. 29, but for a peace march, instead of an anti-globalization demonstration.
"We feel we cannot just look at the situation and mourn.
We also have to take action because the potential consequences are so great," said Richard Becker, a coordinator for the International Action Center, which advocates peace and opposes many Bush administration policies.
Bush was to open the debate of the 189-nation General Assembly on Monday with his first speech to the world body, but New York and federal security forces that normally provide protection for visiting dignitaries have been overwhelmed in the aftermath of the attack on the World Trade Center.
U.N. spokesman Jan Fischer said the General Assembly decided Tuesday to open the debate later in the year.
New York's crisis also prompted the General Assembly to delay a global summit on children's rights scheduled for Wednesday through Friday this week.
It was expected to draw leaders from 80 countries to the U.N.'s headquarters in Manhattan.
Some groups already had flown in children who were victims of war to take part in the summit.
"They came to ask our help in promoting peace and security in their countries," said Ken Brown, a spokesman for a New York University group that sponsored five children from Uganda and Sudan.
"There is no security here either.
Their stories have become our stories."    
Times staff writer Maggie Farley in New York contributed to this story. 
Aviation: Transportation Department will conduct checks before Thanksgiving to ensure safety, an official says. 
Warning that "alarming lapses" remain in the nation's air transportation system, the government's chief transportation watchdog announced plans Wednesday to conduct an undercover operation in the next week to ensure tight security measures are in place by the Thanksgiving travel period. 
Department of Transportation inspector general Kenneth Mead said that, despite noticeably tighter airport security since terrorists hijacked and crashed planes into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, "there are still alarming lapses of security and some systemic vulnerabilities that need to be closed." 
Testifying before the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee, Mead said nearly 90 security breaches have occurred since Oct. 30, when Transportation Secretary Norman Y. Mineta announced a "zero-tolerance" policy to enforce rules. 
Mead provided only one example: a passenger at Baltimore-Washington International Airport who he said was "testing security" on her own with a box cutter concealed in a makeup kit.
The passenger made it through a security checkpoint. 
Mead's office declined to provide other examples, citing security concerns, or to identify the airports that have had the most problems. 
But during the hearing, lawmakers mentioned several other incidents.
Aside from the well-publicized failure of screeners to stop a passenger from carrying knives and a stun gun through a checkpoint at Chicago's O'Hare International Airport, those committing breaches include a security officer who briefly left an exit at Boston's Logan Airport unattended and a passenger who arrived in Chicago on a flight from Miami International Airport with two meat cleavers in his carry-on bags. 
Mead also said airport security workers are not putting as much checked baggage as they could through bomb detection systems.
A survey by his agency of some airports over the Veterans Day weekend found that 73% of the machines were not in continuous use, he said.
At one airport, his staff observed one screener, who was scheduled for a 20-hour shift, falling asleep. 
Such examples stepped up pressure on House and Senate negotiators to end their stalemate over whether workers screening passengers and baggage at airports should be government or private employees, a dispute that has stalled passage of a sweeping air-travel security bill. 
House and Senate negotiators reported making progress Wednesday and are scheduled to resume talks today. 
One compromise under consideration would put federal employees in charge of the screening process but allow airports to use some contract employees.
These employees would have to meet federal standards. 
"Everyone is feeling fairly optimistic" that a deal is in sight, said Andy Davis, an aide to Sen. Ernest F. Hollings (D-S.C.), chairman of the Senate Commerce and Transportation Committee. 
President Bush and others have pressed Congress to send him an aviation security bill before Thanksgiving to help restore public confidence.
Those calls have intensified since the crash in New York on Monday of an American Airlines jet, though no evidence of terrorism has surfaced in that catastrophe. 
A bill passed unanimously by the Senate would federalize all airport security personnel.
President Bush favors the House measure, which would increase federal oversight of airport security but leave it to the administration to decide whether the personnel should be government or private employees or a mix. 
A number of security measures have been taken since the terrorist attacks, such as improving the security of cockpit doors, deploying more air marshals on planes and increasing the use of National Guard troops at airports. 
But Mead testified that background checks need to be conducted on all airport employees, citing cases his agency has found in which felons have had access to secure areas. 
As part of his office's undercover operation to determine if airports are complying with security rules, Mead said his auditors will test how easily they can gain access to restricted areas at airports.
He said his employees will also carry prohibited objects in baggage. 
Federal Aviation Administration administrator Jane Garvey, who also testified at the hearing, called it "disturbing" that security lapses continue, especially with the approach of Thanksgiving, when increased travel loads are forecast.
Airlines: FAA orders U.S. skies cleared and airports closed.
Inbound jetliners from overseas are diverted.
U.S. air travel came to an abrupt halt today after unprecedented terrorist attacks on New York and Washington, clogging airports nationwide and stranding the more than 1.5 million people who ride commercial and chartered jetliners each day.
Aircraft flown by the U.S. Postal Service and cargo carriers, which daily move the nation's mail and billions of dollars worth of goods around the country, also were grounded after the Federal Aviation Administration ordered U.S. skies cleared and airports closed as a precaution.
Federal authorities also quickly diverted international flights bound for the U.S. to other airports, mainly in Canada.
The astonishing shutdown provided one of the most tangible ways Americans across the country felt a direct ripple effect of the attacks on the East Coast.
Depending on how long the shutdown lasts, it also could have a damaging impact on the economy as goods, services and business and leisure travel that are all dependent on the air-travel system are suspended.
The airline industry and the airports--notably Los Angeles International Airport--quickly became a focal point, owing to the terrorists' apparent use of four commercial jetliners to carry out the suicide missions.
All the planes were carrying passengers to California.
American Airlines, the nation's largest airline, confirmed that two of its flights were seized and used in the attacks.
One was Flight 11, a Boeing 767 flying from Boston to Los Angeles.
There were unconfirmed reports that this flight was one of the two that hit the World Trade Center in New York.
The other was Flight 77, a Boeing 757 flying from Washington's Dulles International Airport to Los Angeles.
United Airlines also lost two jetliners, including Flight 175 from Boston's Logan International Airport to Los Angeles, a Boeing 767.
That jet might have been the one that crashed into the Pentagon in Washington, although that could not be immediately confirmed.
United Flight 93, a Boeing 757 jumbo jet en route to San Francisco from Newark, N.J., crashed 80 miles southeast of Pittsburgh.
"We are horrified by these tragic events," said American Airlines Chairman Donald Carty.
Stifling LAX's operations alone, even for a short while, has a huge impact on Southern California.
It's the world's third-busiest airport in terms of passengers handled--more than 200,000 people a day--and its annual economic impact on the region amounts to more than $60 billion.
Mary Jersin, a spokeswoman for Hong Kong-based carrier Cathay Pacific Airways, said all international flights to LAX and elsewhere in the United States were canceled.
Those Cathay Pacific flights already in the air were diverted to Canada or their closest "tech stop," which in the case of a Hong Kong-New York flight would be Anchorage.
American Airlines pilot Larry McCalley, 58, of Mission Viejo arrived at Orange County's John Wayne Airport expecting to work.
But he, like other pilots, was sent home.
McCalley said that until about 10 months ago, the ill-fated American Flight 11 was his flight.
"It just seems a shame that the world has to come to this . . .
all the victims," McCalley said, visibly stunned.
"You think about it, but you look at the probability of something like this happening and you don't really expect it."
John Wayne Airport officials closed that facility about 9 a.m., although few passengers were there at the time.
No flights had taken off, and about 20 jets sat empty and silent at their gates or on the tarmac.
Yolanda Perez, a spokeswoman for the airport, said the facility's secured areas had been evacuated about 7 a.m.--when the first flights leave John Wayne--and cars were barred from parking curbside.
Security was increased, with Irvine police adding to the usual Orange County Sheriff's Department contingent assigned to the airport.
Perez said the airport normally handles about 270 departures and arrivals involving about 6,000 passengers a day.
Xavier Jorquiera, 41, of Rancho Santa Margarita had already boarded an American Airlines flight to Mexico City about 6 a.m. when the order came to evacuate the plane.
He wasn't told the reason until passengers were back in the terminal.
"It's horrible.
It's a tragedy," he said.
Travel and airline experts said the tragic events could result in devastating short-term losses for major U.S. carriers and may lead to higher ticket prices as the companies pass on the costs of tightened security measures to consumers.
Several experts said many airlines' contracts require them to offer full refunds to travelers afraid to fly in the wake of the terrorist attacks, and predicted the airlines would see a drop-off in ticket sales amounting to of hundreds of millions of dollars.
The tragedy today is known as a force majeure incident out of the airlines' control; they can include such events as government orders, bad weather or a hijacking.
In such cases, travelers are entitled to a refund or to accept alternate flights the airlines offer, said Terry Trippler, president of the consulting firm Trippler & Associates in Minneapolis.
Southwest Airlines, the low-fare carrier based in Dallas, said all of its flights were safe and on the ground as of 8:05 a.m. PDT today.
The airline said it will not operate its scheduled flights for the rest of the day.
Parsons said the attacks could lead to a wholesale review of security measures, particularly those for domestic travelers.
"I think in America, we've never had the true fear of travel like you do in Tel Aviv," he said.
"Look at El Al the Israeli airline .
They may inspect your bag three times before it gets on the plane.
You go to Europe, you see the dogs and the guns in the airports.
I think high security we've talked about, we've had opportunities to bring in good equipment, but we've never spent the money on it, not on the domestic side."
But he noted that the terrorists who attacked key targets today evidently didn't need to smuggle bombs aboard planes in order to inflict unimaginable damage.
A multi-ton airliner is "better than any weapon I can think of," Parsons said.
"With these planes and their fuel tanks full, you had a flying bomb."
Travel experts suggested a permanent increase in airline security has been long overdue.
"In the past, passengers have agreed in surveys that they would pay more for security," Trippler said.
"How much more remains to be seen.
They've never been told how much more.
Will they pay $10 a ticket?
Five dollars a ticket?
We as consumers have done a lot of complaining on airline lines, but we may have to go back to where everyone is checked in" in person without such timesavers as e-ticketing.
"I've never seen anything like this, where we shut down everything," Trippler said.
"It's going to be worse than any blizzard we've ever had or any storm we've ever had.
People are going to have to be patient.
Patient as hell."
Staff writers Evelyn Iritani in Los Angeles and Kimi Yoshino in Orange County contributed to this story. 
   U.S. officials, eager to see calm in the Middle East as they seek a global anti-terrorism alliance, struggled Thursday to hold Israelis and Palestinians to a fragile cease-fire that was threatened by shootings and rising political opposition.
Palestinian gunmen early Thursday opened fire on a family of Jewish settlers traveling near Tekoa, a settlement in the West Bank.
A 26-year-old mother of three was killed and her husband badly wounded.
Their two toddlers and 4-month-old infant, who were riding in the car's back seat, witnessed their mother's death but escaped injury.
Five Israeli soldiers and a civilian security guard were injured in shootings in the Gaza Strip later Thursday, and Palestinian officials reported one Palestinian killed by Israeli fire in Gaza.
Palestinian Authority President Yasser Arafat on Tuesday declared a wide-ranging cease-fire, and Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon responded by pulling back troops from some Palestinian territory and halting military offensives.
Both were under enormous U.S. and European pressure to defuse the conflict, which has killed about 800 people in the last year.
Yet no sooner had hopes of a breakthrough arisen than new violence put the efforts in doubt.
"I am very sorry that the Palestinian Authority has not honored its cease-fire pledge," Sharon said Thursday.
In the evening, he convened his Cabinet to decide whether Israel will continue to uphold its end of the bargain.
Also up for debate was whether his foreign minister, Shimon Peres, will be allowed to meet with Arafat--a move that U.S. officials have been urging since the Sept. 11 attacks against the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
The Bush administration desperately wants a truce here to clear the way for moderate Arab and Muslim states to join a U.S.-led alliance that will fight terrorism.
Arab regimes will be reluctant to join if Israeli-Palestinian violence is raging, diplomats say.
In an attempt to show his willingness to cooperate, Arafat took the unusual step of telephoning and promising Peres and U.S. Consul General Ronald Schlicher that he will hunt and arrest the shooters in the Tekoa slaying.
The gunmen were seen heading toward Bethlehem, a biblical city that is under Palestinian control.
Arafat needs to give at least the appearance of making every attempt to enforce a cease-fire, even as many of his own gunmen say they oppose it.
And it is not known whether radical Islamic groups responsible for recent suicide bombings here will adhere to the truce.
Arafat's actions, and Sharon's to a lesser extent, are in large part a result of an unusual flurry of U.S. diplomatic activity.
In the nine days following the attacks in the U.S., Secretary of State Colin L. Powell had 19 telephone conversations with Sharon, Arafat and Peres in an attempt to elicit their cooperation, according to American sources.
This represents a marked shift from the Bush administration's previous "hands-off" approach to Middle East peacemaking.
An account offered Thursday provided insight into the American actions here as part of the broader, emerging war effort.
It also revealed a new American impatience with Sharon, who has enjoyed wide administration support.
As the Americans pressed their case, Arafat quickly realized that he would be viewed as being on the wrong side of the fight against terrorism if he continued to prosecute the year-old Palestinian uprising, diplomatic sources said.
"I think it shook him up," a Western diplomat said.
"He realized that this the uprising has got to change or he would be seen as part of the problem."
Sharon presented a tougher case for Powell and the Americans, the diplomat said.
"I don't think he yet sees an opportunity," said the official, who requested anonymity.
"The mistrust is still deep enough that he sees it as a problem rather than the other way around.
He wants Arafat to undo what he's done in the last year."
Last Friday, President Bush spoke to Sharon by telephone, imploring him to allow truce talks between Peres and Arafat.
Sharon flatly refused.
But two days later, apparently aware that he had gone too far in snubbing Bush at a time of crisis, Sharon offered to call off Israel's military offensives and eventually allow talks to go ahead.
"The prime minister doesn't see things exactly the way administration officials do," the Western diplomat said.
American officials "conveyed the message that this administration is working with you and wants to continue working with you, but life for us has changed."
Sharon called Powell in the predawn hours Thursday to complain that the Palestinians were not upholding the cease-fire, and both spoke again Thursday afternoon.
Sharon had not called off the cease-fire late in the day but signaled that it was in jeopardy, the diplomat said.
Overall, violence has ebbed in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
But the killing of the settler will enormously complicate Sharon's political situation, stirring a backlash from his right-wing constituents.
Hard-line members of Sharon's government attended the funeral for the settler, Sarit Amrani, on Thursday and demanded that the prime minister refuse to observe a cease-fire and instead retaliate harshly.
Israeli commentators blasted Sharon on Thursday either for caving in to foreign pressure, or for initially miscalculating the American mood and believing that events in the U.S. gave him a green light to open fierce offensives on the Palestinians.
Last week, Israel carried out its deadliest, deepest incursions into Palestinian territory while American attention was focused elsewhere.
Meanwhile, Palestinian officials said Thursday that they were doing their best to enforce the cease-fire and that it would take time to silence all the weapons.
They called for a lifting of the stifling closures that Israel has imposed on most Palestinian towns.
Israeli officials said they remained convinced that Arafat had no real intention of renouncing violence.
All previous cease-fires in the last year of conflict have collapsed. 
Safety:
Whistle-blowers say the agency overlooks problems brought to its attention to avoid conflicts with airlines.
As Congress debates broad reforms of an air security system seen as still vulnerable to terrorism, Federal Aviation Administration whistle-blowers warn that lawmakers risk perpetuating management flaws of the past.
Members of a loose-knit group of former and current security agents say the new system must make a sharp break with an institutional philosophy they allege has led the agency to overlook problems in order to avoid conflicts with the airlines.
The critics say that FAA managers have tipped off airport security companies about upcoming inspections, downplayed concerns that planes and other secure areas are vulnerable to intruders and discouraged field agents from pursuing enforcement cases.
The FAA declined to make senior security officials available to rebut the complaints, saying they are too busy dealing with the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
"Our FAA security agents are out every day testing security at the airports," spokeswoman Rebecca Trexler said.
"When we find a problem, we make sure those problems are immediately fixed."
The critics disagree.
"There's a culture of career bureaucrats within FAA security, and it is this culture that continues to promulgate a facade of security," said Brian Sullivan, who retired in January after 10 years as an FAA special agent.
"
Regardless of what the FAA says, the system is still vulnerable."
A current FAA security official added: "My anger is not toward the terrorists, because I know there are evil people in the world.
My anger is with management, because they knew there were major vulnerabilities."
The official asked not to be identified for fear of being fired.
Some of the critics are veterans of the FAA's "red teams"--small, secretive units specifically created to probe for security weaknesses.
Formed after the 1988 Pan Am Flight 103 bombing over Lockerbie, Scotland, red teams are supposed to constantly try to foil FAA and airline security officers.
A current official complained that red team findings are not acted on.
"One of the big frustrations, particularly on the red team, is that we write reports . . .
and they don't do anything."
He believes field agents should have the authority to immediately shut down an operation if they discover a significant security breach.
Until now, airlines and airports have had primary responsibility for aviation security, under FAA supervision and guidance.
Airlines traditionally have been concerned that too much security could lead to delays, upsetting the complex choreography of flights.
Next week, Congress is expected to resume debate about reforming the system, amid widespread anecdotal evidence that security remains uneven.
Experts say that measures taken by the FAA after Sept. 11--such as only allowing ticket holders past security--undoubtedly have helped.
But "the system is still not secure," said Patricia Friend, president of the Assn.
of Flight Attendants.
She blamed "virtual control" of the FAA by the airlines.
So far, much of the attention in the congressional debate has centered on whether security checkpoint screeners should be federal employees.
But the FAA whistle-blowers say that how the new system is managed may be a more important issue.
Lawmakers agree that a new security agency should take over responsibility from the FAA and the airlines.
But while some would place the new agency within the Transportation Department, others believe it would be more effective as part of the Justice Department.
Some of the whistle-blowers say there's an even more fundamental issue.
"What we need is accountability and remedies," said Steve Elson, who was an agent during the 1990s.
A former Navy SEAL and FAA red team member, Elson said he has spent thousands of dollars of his own money traveling to Washington from his Louisiana home to meet with congressional aides.
He once startled congressional investigators by showing up for a meeting with a fistful of the special baggage tags that airline gate agents use to send last-minute bags to the cargo hold.
A staffer who was present said Elson was trying to show how easily a terrorist could have gotten the tags.
* FAA officials notify private security companies of undercover inspections at passenger checkpoints.
Elson provided copies of 1997 FAA communications in which a headquarters official acknowledges telling the companies of upcoming inspections.
The acknowledgment came in response to queries from surprised field agents who discovered that the companies were waiting for them.
However, the headquarters official wrote that the notification was part of a strategy to see how well security screeners could do if they knew they were being watched and that it would not be repeated.
"I hope that puts everybody's mind at rest," the official wrote.
"There's a plan; just have patience."
Still, Sullivan and Elson said they have been involved in other inspections during which they either suspected or later found out that security companies had been tipped off.
* Chronic problems in preventing unauthorized access to planes and secure airport areas have not been resolved.
In 1999, the Transportation Department's inspector general's office reported to Congress that its agents had breached airport security zones in 117 of 173 tries, even boarding planes without being challenged.
The FAA reassured lawmakers, saying it had cracked down hard and that its own testing showed its agents were being caught 96% of the time.
The inspector general, however, challenged the FAA's comparison as "misleading."
Sullivan and others say there still are gaps, particularly when it comes to guarding airplanes on the tarmac late at night.
"There is no requirement that at the end of the workday, each individual aircraft be locked up," a current FAA official said.
Moreover, Elson has circulated copies of an internal memo indicating that FAA testers breached security zones at a major airport on 446 of 450 tries in 1998.
* Managers discourage agents from initiating enforcement actions.
Sullivan alleges that a new enforcement policy outlined earlier this year was misconstrued by mid-level managers, who began citing it as justification to block cases.
The policy was outlined in a May 30 memo from then-FAA security chief Michael Canavan.
In the memo, Canavan said the FAA should not fine airlines and airports if a security violation is "unaggravated" and the problem has been permanently fixed.
"I want to continue to give our partners a realistic opportunity to comply with the regulations and to work with us," Canavan wrote.
But Sullivan--by then retired--said field agents told him that managers were misinterpreting the order.
Agents were being told not to pursue fines as long as there was a written plan to address the security problems, Sullivan said.
"We have a paper fix," he wrote in an Aug. 16 e-mail to Canavan. "
Nice looking plans, but no real fix."
Six days later, Canavan sent back a terse reply: "From what I have been able to see and hear, you are right.
This is being fixed.
"
What was done to resolve the issue remains unclear.
Canavan was not available for comment for this report.
The former Army general, hired at the FAA in December, recently left the agency.
   Citing internment camps, civil rights groups plan a candlelight vigil in support of Muslims and Arab Americans. 
Rui Satamura's high school yearbooks evoke bitter memories--of being called a "Jap" and spending two years in an Arizona internment camp. 
She once had two sets of yearbooks.
She kept the pair created for students at camp but tossed out the ones from Los Angeles High School, symbolically banishing the pain. 
Now, since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, people have vandalized Islamic institutions, and Arab Americans have complained that men of Middle Eastern appearance have been taken off airplanes for questioning. 
The FBI, meanwhile, is investigating the fatal shooting of a Pakistani grocer in Dallas, and Arizona authorities said racial hatred triggered the killing of a Sikh gas station attendant in Mesa.
In those two cases, the victims were neither Muslim nor Arab. 
"If they look like they are people from the Middle East, they are targeted," said Satamura, 78. 
For Satamura and other older Japanese Americans, the scattered assaults on Arab Americans and Muslims are opening afresh a wound that never completely healed. 
Even as they join in the nation's mass grieving and decry the terrorists' deeds, they are reliving their own experiences of being shunned by neighbors and carted off to internment camps after the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor. 
No one has called for detaining Arab Americans en masse, and, unlike 1942, many political leaders and clergy are urging tolerance. 
President Bush, referring to his Transportation secretary, said last week that the nation "can't have another situation like the one Norm Mineta was in during World War II.
" As a boy of 10, Norman Y. Mineta, a former Democratic congressman from San Jose, was interned along with his family. 
With some law enforcement agencies advocating the use of racial profiling as they seek out suspected terrorists, Japanese Americans are eagerly sharing their wartime recollections and saying that what happened to them must not happen again.
To show support for Arab Americans and Muslims, two Japanese American civil rights organizations plan a candlelight vigil in Little Tokyo Friday evening. 
"There was a rush to judgment about us during World War II," said John Tateishi, national executive director of the Japanese American Citizens League.
"As angered as we all are by this dastardly act, it's really important we maintain our protections and sense of democracy and fair play." 
A sense of fair play was a quick casualty once the United States entered the war, said Jim Hirabayashi, a retired anthropologist from San Francisco State University. 
"If the rights that you have aren't any good during times of crisis, they're not very good at all," said Hirabayashi, 74.
"If you erode away your rights at any time, then it's an erosion of the basic American democracy." 
In 1942, Hirabayashi's large family was forced to move from a small rural enclave in Washington state to Tule Lake Segregation Center, the benign official name of a remote outpost on the California-Oregon border. 
His brother Gordon, now in his 80s, was one of a few who defied the infamous Executive Order 9066, which led to the internment of about 112,000 residents of Japanese descent, two-thirds of whom were American citizens.
Gordon, a Quaker pacifist who was in his senior year at the University of Washington, violated curfew orders aimed primarily at Japanese Americans and then refused to serve in the military.
He spent two years in jail. 
Gordon Hirabayashi challenged the curfew order and another order requiring the banishment of Japanese Americans from the West Coast.
He pushed his court battle to the U.S. Supreme Court, which ruled against him.
More than 40 years later, in 1987, a federal appeals court threw out his conviction after government documents were unearthed that showed the military knew Japanese Americans posed no threat during the war. 
But at the time, many people perceived Japanese Americans as a threat. 
Mary Hatate, who like Satamura lives in the Keiro Retirement Home in Los Angeles, was 12 when the Japanese pounded Pearl Harbor.
For a long time after, she said, she felt as if she wanted to disappear whenever anyone mentioned "the enemy." 
The bombing occurred on a Sunday, and children reported back to school Monday, when President Franklin D. Roosevelt's "Date of Infamy" speech was broadcast. 
"I remember, I wanted to crouch down in my seat," Hatate said.
"I don't know if it was because I was frightened or embarrassed.
I just remember trying to hide." 
Keiro resident Grace Morikawa, 75, recalled that the abuse continued even at war's end.
After she was released from camp, she returned to Eagle Rock and put an ad in the newspaper soliciting work.
The hate calls started soon after.
One day someone planted a sign on the front lawn that said "Here Lives a Jap." 
Many Japanese Americans doubt that today's society would tolerate another roundup of people based on ancestry. 
"I think there are too many people willing to stand up against that," Tateishi said.
"There are too many political leaders in the Congress who would oppose it." 
One key difference between World War II and now is the nearly instantaneous flow of news today.
In 1942, when Japanese Americans were rounded up, many people east of the Rockies knew nothing about it, Tateishi said. 
At the Keiro nursing home, the thoughts of many residents turn to Arab American children.
Morikawa remembers the day after Pearl Harbor, when her teacher explained that Japanese Americans shouldn't be confused with people in Japan. "
The teacher was trying to do a good thing, but I was embarrassed," she said. 
Aiko O. King, 74, grimaced at the thought of young Arab Americans facing taunts at school. 
"I can tell how they feel," King said.
"I don't want this to happen to another innocent group.
We were guilty until proven innocent." 
"Here is America struck by God Almighty in one of its vital organs, so that its greatest buildings are destroyed.
Grace and gratitude to God.
America has been filled with horror from north to south and east to west, and thanks be to God that what America is tasting now is only a copy of we have tasted.
Our Islamic nation has been tasting the same for more 80 years, of humiliation and disgrace, its sons killed and their blood spilled, its sanctities desecrated.
God has blessed a group of vanguard Muslims, the forefront of Islam, to destroy America.
May God bless them and allot them a supreme place in heaven, for He is the only one capable and entitled to do so.
When those have stood in defence of their weak children, their brothers and sisters in Palestine and other Muslim nations, the whole world went into an uproar, the infidels followed by the hypocrites.
A million innocent children are dying at this time as we speak, killed in Iraq without any guilt.
We hear no denunciation, we hear no edict from the hereditary rulers.
In these days, Israeli tanks rampage across Palestine, in Ramallah, Rafah and Beit Jala and many other parts of the land of Islam, and we do not hear anyone raising his voice or reacting.
But when the sword fell upon America after 80 years, hypocrisy raised its head up high bemoaning those killers who toyed with the blood, honour and sanctities of Muslims.
The least that can be said about those hypocrites is that they are apostates who followed the wrong path.
They backed the butcher against the victim, the oppressor against the innocent child.
I seek refuge in God against them and ask Him to let us see them in what they deserve.
I say that the matter is very clear.
Every Muslim after this event (should fight for their religion), after the senior officials in the United States of America starting with the head of international infidels, (U.S. President George W.) Bush and his staff who went on a display of vanity with their men and horses, those who turned even the countries that believe in Islam against us - the group that resorted to God, the Almighty, the group that refuses to be subdued in its religion.
They (America) have been telling the world falsehoods that they are fighting terrorism.
In a nation at the far end of the world, Japan, hundreds of thousands, young and old, were killed and (they say) this is not a world crime.
To them it is not a clear issue.
A million children (were killed) in Iraq, to them this is not a clear issue.
But when a few more than 10 were killed in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam, Afghanistan and Iraq were bombed and hypocrisy stood behind the head of international infidels, the modern world's symbol of paganism, America, and its allies.
I tell them that these events have divided the world into two camps, the camp of the faithful and the camp of infidels.
May God shield us and you from them.
Every Muslim must rise to defend his religion.
The wind of faith is blowing and the wind of change is blowing to remove evil from the Peninsula of Mohammad, peace be upon him.
As to America, I say to it and its people a few words: I swear to God that America will not live in peace before peace reigns in Palestine, and before all the army of infidels depart the land of Mohammad, peace be upon him.
God is the Greatest and glory be to Islam."
When Jerry Seinfeld announced plans to stage a comedy fund-raiser for victims of the Sept. 11 attacks, he was not worried that stand-up routines might seem too trivial in the wake of the deadly events that shook the nation.
"It's always been too trivial," declared the comedian who made his fortune on a sitcom about
nothing."That's what makes it funny.
It was never important.
It's not meant for social change.
It's meant for fun."
Seinfeld was echoing what Tom Hanks had said in leading off a parade of movie and rock stars in an earlier high-profile benefit.
"We are not healers," Hanks noted during last month's "America: A Tribute to Heroes."
"We are merely artists, entertainers, here to raise spirits and, we hope, a great deal of money."
The humility seems genuine in both cases, and refreshing, given that it comes from entertainers who command $20 million a movie or $1 million an episode.
But there is a difference between the movie star and the stand-up comedian: One reads lines written by others, while the other writes his own
material?and it's often, even in Seinfeld's case, a commentary on society.
That?and obvious matters of taste?are what has made comedy so tricky in the weeks since Sept. 11, whether for David Letterman or Jay Leno or Seinfeld and the rest of the comics he lined up for "Stand-Up for New York," a benefit at Carnegie Hall on Monday night that raised $1,859,400.
The issue by then was not so much whether it was acceptable to tell jokes while rescue crews were still digging for bodies and while bombs were falling overseas.
No less than Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, kicking off the concert nine days after he appeared on "Saturday Night Live," said that was OK.
"I'm here to give you permission to laugh," he told the audience. "
And if you don't, I'll have you arrested.
"
The issue, then, was whether to tackle the current events?or avoid them.
The comedy veterans of the lineup?Alan King, Bill Cosby, George Wallace and Seinfeld himself?did the latter.
The white-bearded 73-year-old King acknowledged the moment, saying, "It's like entertaining the troops," but quickly added, "which I did in the Spanish-American War," segueing him into a barrage of old geezer jokes, like how he was at the age "where my prostate is bigger than my ego."
But others dived into the news, with Chris Rock even musing on why people are ambivalent about America.
"America's like the uncle who paid my way though college," he said, "and molested me."
The risks of such an approach are obvious.
But it's equally obvious to an audience if the comedian is pretending there's no 500-pound gorilla outside the concert hall?if not on the stage.
So should comedy soothe or unsettle?
It's no simple either/or, but Seinfeld's night provided arguments for the benefits of each.
When he disclosed plans for the fund-raiser, Seinfeld downplayed all the talk about the post-Sept.
11 adjustments required in all aspects of American entertainment.
"The entertainment industry, like every other creative aspect of the culture, always has to be responding moment to moment to people's taste and feelings, and they succeed or fail at that all the time, even in normal times," Seinfeld said two weeks ago.
"Most movies and TV shows?sometimes people feel like they don't relate, it's not current ... '
I don't like that show, so it dies.'
Reacting to the cultural mood is what entertainment is ....
This is a major shift that happened very suddenly, so it will require an immediate shift.
But that's the job.
"
Some peers no doubt would see Seinfeld as underselling the possibilities of comedy when he called it "never important," simply "for fun."
Yet one of the greatest film comedies argued that there were few higher callings than providing a good laugh, especially in hard times.
The film director protagonist in Preston Sturges' 1941
"Sullivan's Travels" is intent on documenting the suffering of the Depression masses ("I want to hold a mirror up to life") until he sees inmates get relief?by howling at a Mickey Mouse cartoon.
"That's my job, to lighten the load," said Wallace, offering a set of familiar bits Monday:
You've seen all those 'Men at Work' signs around town, right? "
Have you ever seen men actually working?
" he asked.
And later, "How come you never see Boy Scout cookies?
"
With the right smile from the comedian, who has no doubt used the lines a zillion times on the road, a willing audience went along even with those.
But the contrast in approach could not have been greater with the two comics who surrounded Wallace, both of whom scrambled in recent weeks to work up fresh post-Sept.
11 routines, trying out bits at local comedy clubs.
"I'm not going to start trouble here, but ... ," began Colin Quinn, the former "SNL" "news anchor" who worked his set around the events.
What was that about authorities saying there was "a 100% chance of retaliation" by Osama bin Laden? "
If it's 100%, it's not a chance," Quinn noted.
He teased New Yorkers who seem intent on telling stories of how they "almost" went to the towers the day of the attacks, he suggested how Germany was eager to join the American coalition ("just let us push a button for old times' sake"), and he talked about how this seemed to be the first politically correct war.
"We bomb them?then throw food at them."
By the time Rock came on, after Wallace, he was ready with his own variation on that bit, but doing it one better, making it specific?he envisioned a 50-pound bag of food falling on some poor, starving 40-pound Afghan.
Rock also pondered why there were only religious extremists, not extremist bakers.
He suggested that rap mogul Suge Knight might be the person to go after Bin Laden.
And he wondered whether he or his affluent audience, which included former President Clinton and billionaire Donald Trump, were really ready for war.
Were they ready to go to Brownsville, even, the inner city?
"We support the war, but we're not ready," Rock said.
"I'm not even ready to be a crossing guard."Rock paces the stage, he flashes smiles and he cackles, but he is there to push his audiences, usually about race or sex relations?and here about terrorism and war.
Inevitably, it didn't all go over, especially his rant about how "we worship money in America."
Is it too crass for him to mock the reports of how "the Dow Jones is down!"
after the World Trade Center went down?
When Cosby came out after Rock, in a "Hello Friend" sweat shirt, he did not even tease the audience with the topical.
Instead, he sat in a chair and shared some of the greatest long routines in stand-up history.
He became a child right there, going back 60 years, to a time when he listened to trouble-making demons in his little tummy ... profound stuff, yet funny.
Yet not nearly as funny as his final dentist bit, which made a point of not making a point?except that Cosby still could, at 64, bring tears to an audience's eyes by pretending to be in that dentist's chair, his lip numb from the foot-long needle, dribbling water, trying to speak to the doc, making a complete fool of himself.
When Seinfeld announced the fund-raiser, he confessed to one motive beyond charity.
"We're all very excited about performing with Mr. Cosby," he said.
So his own act of courage Monday was coming out after the comedy legend.
Still looking boyish for his 47 years, Seinfeld spoke of trying to figure out "what the hell is going on."
As he suggested weeks before, though, he didn't mean in the big world beyond?he meant in our silly everyday lives.
He joked about drug commercials that give you no idea what the drug is for
("Ask your doctor about Cram-It-All!").
And why do women draw dark lines around their lips?
"
On behalf of the men of planet Earth?we're aware you have lips."
And "Why are the credits so long at the end of the movie?"
Seinfeld has the lines down, well-honed, after a recent nationwide tour, and the audience is on the side of "your strange little TV friend," as he called himself.
If he seemed on the surface like a pleasant Sunday afternoon ...
well, that's what he promised.
And though Seinfeld might pooh-pooh such a notion, there's a mission in his safe, near-banal madness.
"The important thing about tonight is not just that you came here and did this?because
you had nothing to do.
That's why we're here.
We had nothing to do, either," he said near evening's end.
"I think it's important you have something to talk about tomorrow.
Because people need to fill in what really amounts to be a great amount of dead air."
He was joking, naturally, but he did sound vaguely like what Beckett's despairing character Vladimir says in "Waiting for Godot," where he and his buddy Estragon successfully complete another few minutes of banter, and life.
"That passed the time," Vladimir says.
Key lawmakers reached a compromise Monday on anti-terrorism legislation that would deny Atty.
Gen. John Ashcroft some of the more sweeping powers he is seeking from Congress, but it would still mark a major expansion of law enforcement authority. 
The bill, which the House could consider as early as next week, would dramatically enhance investigators' ability to conduct electronic surveillance, detain foreign suspects and seek stiffer criminal penalties in terrorism cases. 
But the measure would strip out or scale back a number of controversial proposals offered by the White House, including the authority to indefinitely detain foreign nationals identified by the attorney general as terrorist threats. 
The bill still must clear a number of legislative hurdles and is separate from similar legislation being crafted in the Senate.
But it provides the first clear view of Congress' likely direction on anti-terrorism legislation in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks on New York and the Pentagon. 
The compromise was negotiated by Reps. F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-Wis.) and John Conyers Jr.
(D-Mich.), the chairman and the ranking minority member, respectively, of the House Judiciary Committee.
Their endorsements will carry considerable weight with their colleagues. 
Scott McClellan, a White House spokesman, declined to discuss details of the House bill but said the administration "appreciates the willingness of Congress to work in a bipartisan way to give the attorney general important additional tools." 
Civil liberties groups said the measure was a marked improvement over Ashcroft's initial proposal, which drew heavy criticism from such disparate organizations as the National Rifle Assn.
and the American Civil Liberties Union. 
But many critics weren't assuaged by the revisions. 
"It's inadequate," said Laura W. Murphy, director of the ACLU's national office in Washington.
"The potential for abuse is still great here." 
The anti-terrorism bill is now seen as one of the top priorities on Capitol Hill, where the congressional agenda has been rewritten since suicide hijackers commandeered four jetliners last month.
Three of the planes slammed into the World Trade Center towers and the Pentagon; one crashed in rural Pennsylvania. 
President Bush and top White House officials have urged Congress to move swiftly to grant law enforcement agencies sweeping new powers that would both aid their ongoing investigation of the attacks and help prevent future strikes. 
Authorities need new tools "to identify, dismantle, disrupt and punish terrorist organizations before they strike again," Ashcroft said in testimony last week before the House and the Senate Judiciary committees.
"Terrorism is a clear and present danger to Americans today." 
But even with Congress in a wartime mood, members of both parties have expressed deep misgivings about provisions of the Ashcroft proposal that they fear would erode privacy rights and civil liberties. 
Sensenbrenner and Conyers eliminated some of those provisions, rejecting proposals that would have enabled law enforcement to seize the assets of suspected terrorists, conduct criminal property searches without notifying suspects, access a greater range of student records and cooperate with foreign governments to conduct electronic surveillance of U.S. citizens here and abroad. 
The House lawmakers also added provisions that the White House may not welcome.
The House bill, for instance, would create a watchdog position in the Justice Department to oversee the protection of civil liberties, with the power to investigate citizens' complaints of abuses. 
The House version also contains a clause that would cause provisions expanding authorities' wiretapping powers to expire after two years and would require congressional review before they are renewed.
Ashcroft has argued against including such a "sunset" provision. 
Other elements were significantly modified.
Ashcroft's initial request for authority to detain foreign nationals indefinitely, for example, has been watered down to allow for a detention of a maximum of seven days.
At that point, authorities would either have to file charges against the detainee--opening the door to judicial review--or release him. 
The House lawmakers granted Ashcroft's request for "roving wiretap" authority, meaning that investigators would no longer be restricted to monitoring a specific telephone or other instrument but instead could track a suspect's communications across multiple devices. 
The revised bill would also expand law enforcement's ability to conduct secret surveillance, even of U.S. citizens, under the aegis of gathering foreign intelligence.
This, critics said, represents a major erosion of citizens' protections under criminal codes, which place a greater burden on investigators to prove in court that they have just cause for such surveillance. 
"The change would allow the government, even in a criminal investigation, to conduct secret wiretapping, secret searches and seizures and never tell the criminal defendant it had done so," said Kate Martin, director of the Center for National Security Studies, a civil liberties advocacy organization in Washington. 
Critics also say the House bill does not go far enough in tightening the definition of what constitutes "terrorism.
" This is a crucial point because the legislation gives law enforcement a host of new powers that can only be used in cases of suspected terrorist activity. 
The House lawmakers inserted language specifying that terrorist acts are those "calculated to influence or affect the conduct of government by intimidation or coercion." 
But, said Murphy of the ACLU, that definition is "still so overly broad that it could apply to a protester who throws a rock through an office building." 
The bill is scheduled to be considered by the full House Judiciary Committee this week.
A committee aide said it is expected to be approved and sent to the full House for a vote, perhaps as early as next week. 
Meanwhile, members of the Senate Judiciary Committee continued to pursue separate negotiations with the Justice Department on their version of the anti-terrorism bill. 
Negotiations among staff "were largely concluded over the weekend," said David Carle, spokesman for Sen. Patrick J. Leahy (D-Vt.), the committee's chairman.
"There are still a couple of differences and still some draft proposals being exchanged to try to resolve those."
Key lawmakers reached a compromise Monday on anti-terrorism legislation that would deny Atty.
Gen. John Ashcroft some of the more sweeping powers he is seeking from Congress, but it would still mark a major expansion of law enforcement authority. 
The bill, which the House could consider as early as next week, would dramatically enhance investigators' ability to conduct electronic surveillance, detain foreign suspects and seek stiffer criminal penalties in terrorism cases. 
But the measure would strip out or scale back a number of controversial proposals offered by the White House, including the authority to indefinitely detain foreign nationals identified by the attorney general as terrorist threats. 
The bill still must clear a number of legislative hurdles and is separate from similar legislation being crafted in the Senate.
But it provides the first clear view of Congress' likely direction on anti-terrorism legislation in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks on New York and the Pentagon. 
The compromise was negotiated by Reps. F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-Wis.) and John Conyers Jr.
(D-Mich.), the chairman and the ranking minority member, respectively, of the House Judiciary Committee.
Their endorsements will carry considerable weight with their colleagues. 
Scott McClellan, a White House spokesman, declined to discuss details of the House bill but said the administration "appreciates the willingness of Congress to work in a bipartisan way to give the attorney general important additional tools." 
Civil liberties groups said the measure was a marked improvement over Ashcroft's initial proposal, which drew heavy criticism from such disparate organizations as the National Rifle Assn.
and the American Civil Liberties Union. 
But many critics weren't assuaged by the revisions. 
"It's inadequate," said Laura W. Murphy, director of the ACLU's national office in Washington.
"The potential for abuse is still great here." 
The anti-terrorism bill is now seen as one of the top priorities on Capitol Hill, where the congressional agenda has been rewritten since suicide hijackers commandeered four jetliners last month.
Three of the planes slammed into the World Trade Center towers and the Pentagon; one crashed in rural Pennsylvania. 
President Bush and top White House officials have urged Congress to move swiftly to grant law enforcement agencies sweeping new powers that would both aid their ongoing investigation of the attacks and help prevent future strikes. 
Authorities need new tools "to identify, dismantle, disrupt and punish terrorist organizations before they strike again," Ashcroft said in testimony last week before the House and the Senate Judiciary committees.
"Terrorism is a clear and present danger to Americans today." 
But even with Congress in a wartime mood, members of both parties have expressed deep misgivings about provisions of the Ashcroft proposal that they fear would erode privacy rights and civil liberties. 
Sensenbrenner and Conyers eliminated some of those provisions, rejecting proposals that would have enabled law enforcement to seize the assets of suspected terrorists, conduct criminal property searches without notifying suspects, access a greater range of student records and cooperate with foreign governments to conduct electronic surveillance of U.S. citizens here and abroad. 
The House lawmakers also added provisions that the White House may not welcome.
The House bill, for instance, would create a watchdog position in the Justice Department to oversee the protection of civil liberties, with the power to investigate citizens' complaints of abuses. 
The House version also contains a clause that would cause provisions expanding authorities' wiretapping powers to expire after two years and would require congressional review before they are renewed.
Ashcroft has argued against including such a "sunset" provision. 
Other elements were significantly modified.
Ashcroft's initial request for authority to detain foreign nationals indefinitely, for example, has been watered down to allow for a detention of a maximum of seven days.
At that point, authorities would either have to file charges against the detainee--opening the door to judicial review--or release him. 
The House lawmakers granted Ashcroft's request for "roving wiretap" authority, meaning that investigators would no longer be restricted to monitoring a specific telephone or other instrument but instead could track a suspect's communications across multiple devices. 
The revised bill would also expand law enforcement's ability to conduct secret surveillance, even of U.S. citizens, under the aegis of gathering foreign intelligence.
This, critics said, represents a major erosion of citizens' protections under criminal codes, which place a greater burden on investigators to prove in court that they have just cause for such surveillance. 
"The change would allow the government, even in a criminal investigation, to conduct secret wiretapping, secret searches and seizures and never tell the criminal defendant it had done so," said Kate Martin, director of the Center for National Security Studies, a civil liberties advocacy organization in Washington. 
Critics also say the House bill does not go far enough in tightening the definition of what constitutes "terrorism.
" This is a crucial point because the legislation gives law enforcement a host of new powers that can only be used in cases of suspected terrorist activity. 
The House lawmakers inserted language specifying that terrorist acts are those "calculated to influence or affect the conduct of government by intimidation or coercion." 
But, said Murphy of the ACLU, that definition is "still so overly broad that it could apply to a protester who throws a rock through an office building." 
The bill is scheduled to be considered by the full House Judiciary Committee this week.
A committee aide said it is expected to be approved and sent to the full House for a vote, perhaps as early as next week. 
Meanwhile, members of the Senate Judiciary Committee continued to pursue separate negotiations with the Justice Department on their version of the anti-terrorism bill. 
Negotiations among staff "were largely concluded over the weekend," said David Carle, spokesman for Sen. Patrick J. Leahy (D-Vt.), the committee's chairman.
"There are still a couple of differences and still some draft proposals being exchanged to try to resolve those."
President Bush said today an outpouring of public gifts to the victims of last week's attacks assured victory in the "first phase in the war on terrorism," a nationwide effort to shore up the home front.
At the same time, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell described as an "encouraging development" the new pledge by Palestinian President Yasser Arafat to end the violence in Israel, the West Bank and Gaza.
Palestinian officials said the action was in response to the administration's effort to develop an anti-terrorist coalition.
"Americans have donated $55 million in seven short days," Bush said during a ceremony in the White House Rose Garden.
"At this moment many of our charities are overwhelmed by the public response.
That's the kind of problem we like in America.
"Nobody can threaten this country," he said.
"Oh, they may be able to bomb a building, and obviously disrupt lives.
But we're too great a nation to allow the evil-doers to affect our soul and our spirit."
The ceremony to recognize "our compassionate and generous citizens" seemed to buoy the president's spirits a week after hijacked airliners sliced through the World Trade Center in New York and smashed into the Pentagon outside of Washington.
Inside the damaged Pentagon, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said today that the U.S. military is preparing a sustained offensive against the terrorists responsible for the attack and the governments that shelter them.
"This is a very new type of conflict, or battle or campaign or war or effort, for the United States," Rumsfeld told a news conference.
"As a result, we are moving in a measured manner as we gather information."
He said the target will go far beyond terrorist mastermind Osama bin Laden and his Al Qaida organization.
"We're talking about a very broadly based campaign to go after the terrorist problem where it exists, and it exists in countries across the globe," he said.
"As I've indicated, this one network, Al Qaida, that's receiving so much discussion and publicity may have activities in 50 to 60 countries, including the United States."
But there was little doubt that the most likely target was Afganistan where Bin Laden lives.
Fearing a U.S. attack, thousands of Afgan civilians have fled their homes, many of them hoping to escape to Pakistan despite the Islamabad regime's decision to close the border.
The chief of the U.N. refugee agency, Ruud Lubbers, hurried to Washington to urge the administration to exercise restraint to avoid needless casualties among non-combatants.
"It is importajnt to be aware of the already desperate plight of millions of Afghan civilians and of the humanitarian consequences to ordinary people while formulating policy options," Lubbers said.
Meanwhile, the State Department announced a new contribution of $2 million to Lubbers' agency to provide food and other supplies to Afghan refugees.
Department spokesman Richard Boucher said most of the supplies will be distributed to refugees in Pakistan because all foreign humanitarian workers have left Afghanistan with the exception of two Americans, with their German and Australian colleagues, who are detained on charges of preaching Christianity, a crime in the rigidly Muslim nation.
In another development, the administration said it has no intention of negotiating with the Taliban regime in Afghanistan over terms for the extradition of Bin Laden.
Mullah Moyhammed Omar, the Taliban's supreme leader has convened a panel of Islamic scholars to consider sending Bin Laden to a country--not the United States--for trial.
"Bin Laden must be expelled to a country where he can be brought to justice for his crimes," Boucher said.
"That's what the U.N. resolutions require.
And that's what we would expect to see.
"It's not just that Bin Laden must be brought to justice, but that the whole structure of support for the terrorist organizations has to be dismantled," he said.
"We're not negotiating this.
U.N. resolutions are quite clear."
The response seemed to reduce the already slim chance of a compromise settlement that could head off U.S. military action.
In White Plains, N.Y., a federal grand jury has been convened to investigate the suicide hijackings.
The Associated Press said the panel is expected to issue subpoenas for relevant documents.
The FBI has arrested four persons as material witnesses.
Commerce Secretary Donald Evans said in an interview with CNN that the United States will use the lure of trade relations and the threat of economic sancitons to expand the coalition of nations that has promised to support a U.S. campaign against global terrorism. 
Entertainment:
Eisner expresses faith in current corporate strategy and tries to reassure investors.
Walt Disney Co. Chairman Michael Eisner said Friday that he plans no substantive changes in corporate strategy even though the firm's TV and theme park divisions have been pummeled by last week's terrorist attacks and its stock price dropped to a seven-year low this week. 
In separate wide-ranging interviews, Eisner and senior executives sought to reassure investors that Disney's stock will rebound, and promised no major layoffs as a fallout from last week's tragedies.
But they said additional cost-cutting measures such as reducing theme park operating hours are likely. 
Disney will soon unveil an extensive marketing campaign on its ABC, ESPN and other networks in an attempt to lure back patrons to the company's theme parks, movies and TV shows. 
"We're going to use our own media companies to make sure the word gets out that it's a good idea to have a good time after a period of mourning--to come to our parks, movies and buy 'Snow White' on DVD," Eisner said. 
Last week's events adversely affected major media companies, such as Disney, because of sharp declines in advertising revenue stemming from the round-the-clock news coverage and a reluctance by advertisers to jump back into the market. 
But Disney was particularly hard hit because prolonged travel worries could cut the number of tourists visiting its theme parks, which provide about 35% of the company's operating income.
Although the company declined to provide figures, attendance at the two Disney parks in Anaheim and at Disney World in Orlando, Fla., have declined substantially since the terrorist attacks. 
Disney already was reeling from the softening economy that threatens advertising and tourism, consumer-products sales that are off 50% over the last three years and troubles in its animation division, which eventually will cut nearly 500 jobs.
Overall, the company eliminated 4,000 jobs earlier this year as part of an ongoing cost-cutting program. 
On Friday, Disney's stock closed at $17.87 on the New York Stock Exchange, up 89 cents. 
Eisner said Disney's businesses already are showing signs of recovery, although he did not offer any specific numbers.
He said the comeback reflects the public's desire--and even his own--for diversions such as movies, TV shows, theme parks and sports amid the grim news. 
"By Monday, I thought it's too bad 'Monday Night Football' had been canceled" on the ABC network, Eisner said. 
Disney also is counting on a financial lift soon from the DVD premiere of "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs" next month and the November release of Disney and Pixar 's new film, "Monsters Inc." 
But others suggest that Disney's recovery won't be so quick. 
Jordan Rohan, an analyst with Wit SoundView, estimates the company's cash flow--earnings before interest, taxes and other expenses--will decline by $1.4 billion next year as theme park and broadcasting revenue drops. 
"In the near term, the recent business disruption will be a bit painful for Disney," Rohan said. 
Disney Chief Financial Officer Thomas Staggs conceded that the company will see short-term declines in theme parks, consumer products and broadcasting, but he said it was too early to quantify the effect. 
"It's dangerous and almost certainly misleading to take the initial behavior of people as a bellwether for what may be happening a month from now," Staggs said. 
Added Disney President Robert Iger: "We're not allowing ourselves to overreact to our experience of the last 10 days."
Like other entertainment companies, Disney tightened security Friday in the wake of a warning by the FBI that film studios in California could be terrorist targets after any U.S. airstrikes in Afghanistan. 
As Eisner arrived for work Friday, he said, he circled the company's Burbank lot to make sure no suspicious cars were parked on surrounding streets. 
"I am totally comfortable in my office," Eisner said.
"I am totally comfortable on our lot." 
Eisner cautioned that Hollywood should take precautions but not overreact to uncorroborated threats.
He compared the security concerns Disney faces at its theme parks to those the company dealt with during the Persian Gulf War, which helped trigger a decline of several million visitors and also prompted anxieties over security. 
Eisner said he has been meeting with film and TV executives, as well as Disney producers such as action specialist Jerry Bruckheimer, about whether upcoming projects are appropriate in the wake of the attack.
Disney postponed the Tim Allen comedy "Big Trouble" about a nuclear bomb smuggled aboard an airplane. 
Eisner also indicated his disapproval of comments made by Bill Maher, host of ABC's late-night show "Politically Incorrect," that recent U.S. military actions were cowardly.
The comments prompted Sears and FedEx to withdraw ads from the show.
Eisner said he made his opinion known to ABC executives but stopped short of detailing what he said. 
Although clearly frustrated that Disney's stock is trading so low, Eisner said he does not fear any potential takeover offer.
He predicted the stock will soon recover, adding that other media stocks, such as AOL Time Warner and Viacom , have suffered. 
"To most people, it's still only a piece of paper with a dividend.
The fact that piece of paper is less valuable than it was the day before is significant, but it's not the end of the world.
The piece of paper will be more valuable tomorrow than it was today," Eisner said. 
Eisner commented on Thursday's move by the wealthy Bass family of Texas to jettison 135 million shares--6.4% of Disney's stock--to raise cash for margin loans and other financial needs.
Disney repurchased 50 million of those shares at $15 each. 
"I feel bad for them.
We benefited somewhat by their loss.
We were able to acquire 50 million shares at a price that four months ago would have been unthinkable," Eisner said. 
Disney's stock in the last year has lost more than half its value from its 52-week high of $42 a share.
It plunged nearly 25% this week after the market reopened following the attacks.
Disney executives said the current stock price won't affect the company's plans to acquire Fox Kids Channel in November.
As for Disney's possible investment in AT&T Broadband , Eisner said, "We continue to talk to them." 
Eisner said one reason Disney is not scrambling to change its strategy is that major projects such as the California Adventure and Tokyo DisneySea theme parks are finished, with a second park in Paris close to being completed.
As for a potential third park in Anaheim, theme park chief Paul Pressler said it is still in the very early stages. 
Eisner said that as troubling as last week's events were, his experiences dating back to the 1960s, when he was an ABC executive, have taught him that people resume their hunger for entertainment. 
"We've had some pretty horrible things happen in my career," he said.
"Generally they dissipate, they become part of a horrible history, and people move on with their lives. . . .
The fact of the matter is we've been here before."
Collapse:
Structural engineers say the terrorists apparently knew they had to strike the World Trade Center as low as possible to cause the most damage.
The terrorists who piloted two planes into the World Trade Center apparently managed--either by careful calculation or evil luck--to have hit the buildings at their weakest spot to cause their disastrous collapse, structural engineers said Tuesday. 
"It's like hitting someone at the back of the knee," said Nabih Youssef, a structural engineer who heads the Tall Building Council in Los Angeles and is an expert on the design and strength of skyscrapers.
"With enough weight above you, you take the entire building down." 
Government officials believe the terrorists wrested control of the passenger jets, then skillfully steered the planes toward the doomed towers. 
"Whoever took over the plane knew what they were doing," said Greg Fenves, a professor of civil engineering at UC Berkeley. 
Had the buildings been hit higher up the towers, they would have sustained damage but probably would not have collapsed because the weight on the damaged portion of the building would not have been enough to overwhelm a tower's structural supports, engineers said. 
The planes might have done more damage if they had hit the buildings lower, but they had to fly at a height of about 60 stories to clear nearby buildings.
The first tower was hit at about the 80th story.
The second tower was hit at about the 60th story. 
"They showed some knowledge of physics in the attempt to make the hits as low as possible," said Ron Hamburger, chief structural engineer for ABS Consulting in Oakland and a past president of the Structural Engineers Assn.
of California. 
To many who saw the buildings fall on television, the collapse resembled a planned demolition, especially in the way that the twin towers imploded--tumbling in on themselves.
But engineering experts discounted the notion that additional explosives had been planted around the base of the buildings to ensure that they came down. 
Demolition of a building the size of the ones in the World Trade Center would require "literally hundreds of charges around the building," Hamburger said.
"It's inconceivable to me anyone would be able to place that many charges--even with years of planning." 
Instead, the impact of the planes themselves, and the tremendous heat generated by tons of burning jet fuel--upward of 1,000 degrees Fahrenheit--would suffice to destroy the buildings, said Scott Gustafson, owner of Demtech Inc. of Blue Springs, Mo., one of the world's leading demolition experts. 
A Boeing 767 has a fuel capacity of 20,000 gallons.
A Boeing 757 has an 11,000-gallon fuel capacity.
Because the planes were scheduled for transcontinental flights, they would have been fully loaded with fuel. 
"The plane probably made its way halfway to the core of the structure," Gustafson said.
"The fuel went through a couple of floors, loaded them with fuel, and the impact opened a corridor to the outside for air.
Some fuel probably got into the elevators and spread the fire.
One thing led to another, and it just kept snowballing." 
"It was very well thought out," said Hank Koffman, who directs the construction engineering department at USC.
"These guys were evil geniuses. 
"The plane was really a highly explosive bomb," he said.
Terrorism experts were calling the attack "low-tech and high-concept." 
Even though structural steel used in buildings is coated with a fireproof material, extreme amounts of heat cause the steel to soften and lose its strength.
The weight of the floors above then causes them to crash. 
"The technical term is progressive collapse--the slang term is pancaking," said Ron Klemencic, president of Skilling Ward Magnusson Barkshire, the Seattle firm that engineered the World Trade Center.
"What basically happens is that one floor falls on top of the floor below it, and with one floor falling on top of another there's no way to stop it." 
The steel is protected to certain temperatures and for certain periods of time, but "an explosion of this magnitude would have exceeded all those limits," said James C. Anderson, a professor of civil engineering at USC.
"Buildings are not designed for this.
Not in their wildest dreams.
" 
"Buildings are designed thinking of internally generated heat," added Jon Magnusson, the chairman and chief executive of the Skilling firm.
"Nobody anticipates putting jet fuel in a building.
If you had to build buildings to withstand this sort of event, you wouldn't be able to build any buildings." 
In 1945, a B-25 bomber smashed into the 79th floor of the Empire State Building.
It caused an explosion and fire and killed 14 people but did not destroy the building.
That plane was not loaded with the huge amount of fuel that Tuesday's jetliners carried. 
Engineers suggested that the south tower of the World Trade Center collapsed first, even though it was hit by the second plane, because the fireball caused by the crash was larger and because the plane hit the corner of the building, rather than the center, where there is more structural support. 
The World Trade Center towers have always been a familiar icon to those visiting New York.
They were New York's most frequently purchased postcard image. 
To structural engineers, however, they are famous for something else: their strength. 
"I was personally very surprised to see the entire building collapse," Hamburger said. 
The towers were so tall--1,362 and 1,368 feet--that they swayed by up to 11 inches in a strong wind.
Building towers of such height posed challenges for engineers, requiring development of a new system of construction that placed major supporting elements in the outer portions of the building to increase stability.
Traditionally, such elements had been placed in the building's core around elevators and restrooms. 
At the time of the towers' construction, this "tubular skyscraper" scheme was hailed as the key that would push the world's buildings to elevations undreamed-of by previous generations. 
In most buildings, structural steel supports are 20 to 25 feet apart.
In the World Trade Center, the supports are only 39 inches apart, said John Hooper, a structural engineer with the Skilling Ward Magnusson firm. 
"Watching something come down without our say-so is just a nightmare," Hooper said. 
Because the tubular steel supports are so close to each other, they act as a rigid box, encircling the building and giving it strength. 
"It's quite a famous structural system," said Fenves.
"It's very well-designed." 
Steel buildings in general are known for their strength.
Even less well-designed steel buildings survived the 1906 earthquake in San Francisco and the 1933 Long Beach quake, Youssef said. 
When they were built in 1970, the World Trade Center towers were the world's tallest buildings.
But the strength designed to withstand wind was no match for the fireball of an exploding plane.
"We didn't have any terrorism in mind when the buildings originally went up," Hooper said. 
While engineers are exploring ways to "bomb-proof" buildings to protect occupants from flying glass and crumbling walls, it is considered too costly and not socially desirable to attempt to protect buildings from the type of attack that occurred Tuesday. 
"We'd be living in bunkers," Youssef said.
"We cannot turn the country into bunkers." 
The towers were the focus of one previous terrorist attack--a deadly 1993 car bomb blast in the 16-acre subbasement that tore a 60-by-100-foot hole.
That explosion, however, did not compromise the buildings' structural integrity, and experts said there was no indication that the damage then, which was repaired years ago, had any connection with Tuesday's collapse.
Six men ultimately were convicted for the 1993 bombing, which killed six and injured more than 1,000. 
The buildings housed about 55,000 workers employed by more than 700 firms, including the executive offices of the New York Stock Exchange and leading investment, law and accounting firms.
Counting those passing through the buildings to transact business, their population during working hours routinely exceeded 100,000 people. 
The towers were the centerpiece of an urban renewal project intended to revitalize lower Manhattan.
Construction began in 1966, and the first tower formally opened four years later.
The architect was the late Minoru Yamasaki, who also designed the Century Plaza Towers in Los Angeles.
The twin 110-story towers cost their owners, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, $700 million.
Last July, they were leased to a New York real estate firm for $3.25 billion, one of the largest such deals in history. 
At the time of their opening, the towers were praised as technologically marvelous but aesthetically soulless. 
Stung by that reaction, Yamasaki insisted to one architecture critic that his buildings would "soothe" the human spirit. "
Above all, with political turmoil, traffic problems and vast increases in populations and the tremendous impact of the machine, we must have serenity.
Man needs a serene architecture to save his sanity in today's world." 
Tuesday, those humane sentiments were reduced to rubble and ash.    
Times staff writers Tim Rutten, Thomas H. Maugh II and Kenneth Reich contributed to this story.
The urge to create a super-villain may obscure an understanding of larger issues.
Dark facial hair isn't mandatory, but it adds to the aura of intrigue.
The eyes may be hard-set and smoldering, like the Ayatollah Khomeini's, or soulful and sensitive, like Che Guevara's.
Typically, only a few murky biographical details are known, leaving rumor and legend to fill in the gaps.
But the most crucial trait for any bogeyman of U.S. foreign policy is elusiveness, a protean quality that's both physical and almost metaphysical.
It's what can turn a rogue dictator, rebel commander or head of a sub rosa terrorist network into a mass-media emblem, an international symbol who provokes revulsion in some, adulation in others.
So it is with Osama bin Laden, a man who is lionized in some parts of the Islamic world but condemned by most Americans for the murder of more than 6,000 of their fellow citizens in the assaults on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
Though no proof has yet been made public of his involvement in the Sept. 11 attacks, Bin Laden has quickly become the glowering personification of global terrorism, summoning intense feelings of anger, hatred and anxiety, as well as a gathering fascination.
"We're turning him into a kind of icon of evil," says Richard E. Rubenstein, a professor at the Institute for Conflict Analysis and Resolution at George Mason University in Virginia, and author of "Alchemists of Revolution--Terrorism in the Modern World.
"
The preoccupation with Bin Laden may result in part from the void of new reliable information about him.
Only a handful of Western journalists ever has interviewed him, and with the world bracing for warfare, his movements and motivations can only be guessed at by most people.
The 44-year-old exile's rise to international celebrity is both revealing and disturbing, some foreign policy analysts and cultural observers say.
By focusing so intently on Bin Laden, America may be oversimplifying complex geopolitical issues and forsaking a process of slow, deliberative fact-gathering for a form of ritualized myth-making.
The Bin Laden phenomenon, some argue, reduces the aspirations and grievances of millions of Muslims around the world to a psychological mug shot of just one man.
"The consequence of paying too much attention to this guy is that you're not focusing on the real threat and you're missing potential other threats," says British journalist Simon Reeve, author of "The New Jackals: Ramzi Yousef, Osama bin Laden and the Future of Terrorism" .
"Bin Laden is one part of a bigger picture.
He's one element of a group that is threatening the West now.
The problem will not go away if Bin Laden is attacked, arrested or imprisoned.
Quite the opposite, in fact."
Given Bin Laden's documented track record as a sponsor of anti-Western activities, and his bitter contempt for the United States and the culture it represents, the current attention certainly comes as no surprise.
No one interviewed for this story suggested that Bin Laden shouldn't be regarded as a prime suspect in last month's attacks, though some expressed the fervent wish that the U.S. or its allies would produce a smoking gun, if they have one.
"If we have proof, for God's sake, put it on the table so the whole world would know, and bring this animal to justice," says Ghazi Khan Kan, executive director of the Council on American-Islamic Relations, New York chapter.
Several people also said that examining Bin Laden's personal history and his worldview can shed light on the motivations of the militant Al Qaeda network and other Muslims who support his call for "jihad," or holy war, against the West.
Yet the factors propelling Bin Laden's infamy appear to be more complicated.
Americans, some contend, have a habit of looking at politics, both at home and abroad, in terms of personalities rather than policies.
Saturated with pop psychology, we search for the Freudian underpinnings of complex world events, the Rosebud that will unlock a nexus of cluttered meanings.
Thus, while some commentators have attributed Bin Laden's anti-Western outlook to specific historical events, such as the 1978 Camp David peace accords or the 1991 outbreak of the Gulf War, others trace it to his formative years. "
A key to Bin Laden's holy war against America may be found in his childhood," one British newspaper declared recently, referring to his father's death in a plane crash when Bin Laden was 10.
Slate, the online magazine, framed a Sept. 13 story about the attacks with a spin on Freud's famous query about women: "What Does Osama Bin Laden Want?"
Author David Plotz's chilling conclusion was that Bin Laden wants absolutely nothing the West can offer.
This characterization of Bin Laden as possessed by a kind of inscrutable, all-consuming malice recalls the aliens' nihilistic one-word response in the movie "Independence Day" when the U.S. president asks what they want earthlings to do: "Die."
In fact, says terrorism expert Rubenstein, Bin Laden has made clear in previous remarks that he is seeking to force a U.S. withdrawal from the Arabian peninsula.
He also hopes to destabilize pro-Western regimes in the Middle East and possibly provoke a U.S. military response that will further anger and alienate the Muslim world.
"It's actually quite clear what he wants," Rubenstein says.
"What makes him different is not what he wants, but the way he proposes to get it."
The tabloids also have picked up the pop-psychological narrative thread.
Last week, in one of the more improbable hypotheses, the Globe reported that Bin Laden "suffers from a medical condition that left him with underdeveloped sex organs, and his hatred of the United States began when an American girl laughed at his problem."
While childhood trauma or--who knows?--sexual dysfunction may be part of the equation, Reeve, a former reporter for the Sunday Times of London, says he doesn't think that "Americans really understand the true nature of the threat, and I think people are looking for relatively simplistic analyses."
Michael Klare, a professor of peace and world security studies at Hampshire College in Amherst, Mass., echoes his point.
"It's easier for Americans to personalize a very difficult phenomenon," Klare says, than decipher its root causes.
Whichever psychological profile of Bin Laden one chooses, Reeve suggests, it needs to take stock of his political evolution and the global context that has shaped him. "
Perhaps it's easier for us to imagine Bin Laden as the devil incarnate, who's always had these extreme views.
But if we are to have a chance of preventing these kind of attacks in the future, we need to understand the mentality of the kind of person who would commit these attacks."
As a great world power, America seems to require larger-than-life adversaries.
This may be why a brutal but drab bureaucrat like Slobodan Milosevic and a seriocomic opera character like Panamanian strongman Manuel Noriega never fully engaged the national imagination.
This country gravitates toward more dramatic, enigmatic figures: deranged would-be prophets like Unabomber Ted Kaczynski, or an inscrutable "mastermind of terror" (as U.S. News World Report described Bin Laden) who strikes without warning then melts back into the jungle mists or steals away to a remote mountain lair, like a James Bond villain.
Bin Laden isn't the first foreign adversary to inspire this type of obsessive reaction.
Mexican revolutionary Francisco "Pancho" Villa, Cuban President Fidel Castro, Iran's Khomeini and, more recently, Col. Moammar Kadafi of Libya and Iraq's President Saddam Hussein all have aroused similar sentiments of fear and loathing.
But the dark, often conflicting imagery and loaded descriptive terms surrounding Bin Laden suggest that he has struck several of these archetypal chords simultaneously.
"The closest thing I can think of is, Ho Chi Minh fascinated Americans in the same way," says Klare, referring to the late Vietnamese communist leader.
"Here is an individual Bin Laden , not a government, who has had the audacity to do what governments do, to organize armies and fight major powers.
I don't want to give the impression I admire the man--I despise him.
But one has to recognize the audaciousness and daring.
I think it's a completely unprecedented story."
It's also a story that's being heavily promoted to the American public.
In the weeks since the attacks, Bin Laden's hold on the national imagination appears to have grown, not diminished.
From coast to coast, he is dissected on op-ed pages and demonized on talk radio.
Last week, Bin Laden's doe-eyed visage stared out from the covers of all three major news magazines.
Time chose a softly lit head shot.
Newsweek opted for a pixilated close-up that transformed his face into a mask of blood.
U.S. News World Report showed his features superimposed over a map of Central Asia, a rifle's cross-hairs framing one eye.
These contrasting but complementary images indicate the potency and flexibility of Bin Laden's expanding myth.
Much as the attacks assimilated several of our deepest cultural phobias--our worst-case scenarios of terrorist subterfuge and technology run amok--representations of Bin Laden fuse several legendary bad-guy personas into one frightening composite.
In the eyes of much of the Western mass media, he has become a one-man rogue's gallery, a perversion of Joseph Campbell's mythological prototype, the Hero With a Thousand Faces.
Bin Laden is the Anti-Hero With a Thousand Faces.
"It plays into a kind of tendency we have in American thinking to see everything as taking place in sort of an eternal present, and to make people into characters in a morality play, instead of real historical beings, whose ideas and personalities and everything else develop in the course of time and in an environment," says Rubenstein.
"It's the worst kind of abstraction because it abstracts people from time and place and their environment.
So it's a way of masking them.
They speak like characters in a Greek play.
"
It's a play in which Bin Laden has been scripted and typecast for several different roles.
President Bush's speechwriters have implicitly linked him to Hitler and Stalin, to "the heirs of all the murderous ideologies of the 20th century."
A Sept. 24 story in the Independent, a left-leaning London daily, said Bin Laden "will join the ranks of history's most infamous men," likening him to Chinese communist patriarch Mao Tse-tung and the medieval Mongol warlord Genghis Khan.
"The cocktail of genes, nurture, expertise, alienation and opportunity that creates a charismatic but malevolent leader like that occurs once a century, if that," the story read.
Yet just a week earlier, the Independent had run another story, quite different in tone, declaring that, "to many people in the Islamic world," Bin Laden was "a romantic, T.E. Lawrence-type figure, a freedom fighter against the oppressive Soviet invader.
" The reference was to the fabled Lawrence of Arabia, an Englishman who fought with the Arabs against the oppressive Turkish empire during World War I.
Some commentators refer to Bin Laden's "megalomania" (Washington Post).
Others describe him as "modest, almost shy" (BBC News), a fragile figure with kidney problems who walks with a cane.
A few have compared his charismatic appeal to that of a cult leader, evoking a mesmerizing, modern-day Rasputin ushering brainwashed minions through a high-tech Heaven's Gate.
"The domestic equivalent, I think, would be someone like Charlie Manson: the violence, the drugs, the cult, the fear," says Juliette N. Kayyem, executive director of the program on domestic preparedness at Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government and a former member of the National Commission on Terrorism.
Bin Laden's followers idolize him as the prodigal scion of a Saudi construction magnate, a trust-fund baby so devoted to his cause that he renounced his family's wealth and reportedly now lives like an outlaw, surrounded by his warrior brethren, four wives, multiple children and trusty Kalashnikov rifle.
Western pundits are more inclined to see this as a mark of patrician kookiness: Howard Hughes as Holy Warrior.
Occasionally, the characterizations flat-out contradict each other.
Some reports say Bin Laden spent his youth in ascetic devotions, his nose buried in the Koran.
Others claim he idled it away, drinking and "womanizing" his way through Beirut with other Saudi jet-setters.
One British article has described him as "a tall figure with an aristocrat demeanor," while Newsweek writers Rod Nordland and Jeffrey Bartholet find him "soft-spoken, languid in his movements, almost effeminate."
Even Bin Laden's height is variously listed as 6 feet 3, 6 feet 4 or 6 feet 6.
A few commentators have imputed godlike powers of omniscience to him, marveling at the attack's precision and the planning it must have entailed.
Descriptions of Bin Laden's "elusive" character, the reported 40 attempts made on his life, and his "shadowy" supporters, who are "everywhere and nowhere," have become journalistic commonplaces.
Kayyem thinks that Bin Laden's mythic stature derives in part from his careful stage-management of the Western media.
By limiting access, he enhances his personal mystery. "
He's never been on a talk show.
No one knows what he sounds like.
No one's ever really seen him talk, except a few of those journalists.
U.S. intelligence lost track of him probably over a year ago, so you're not getting any new information," Kayyem says.
"That element of the unknown is kind of fascinating, in an awful way."
Reeve, the British journalist, says he didn't command the resources to interview Bin Laden face to face for his book.
Instead, he drew on unpublished reports and interviews with intelligence agents and others.
Now he says he can see other Western reporters recycling second- and third-hand accounts of Bin Laden.
"I can find information and comments that've clearly been lifted straight from my book," he says.
"There's clearly a reliance on just a few sources of information."
In a way, as Bush told the nation in his speech before Congress two weeks ago, America has seen the likes of Bin Laden before.
But the president's allusions to the last century's towering ogres might have been slightly off the mark.
A closer parallel may be Pancho Villa, a onetime U.S. ally who, after a falling-out, led an attack on Columbus, N.M., in March 1916--the first foreign invasion of the United States since the War of 1812.
After Villa and his army torched the village and killed 18 U.S. citizens, an outraged President Wilson dispatched 7,000 troops to chase him into the mountains of Chihuahua, Mexico.
Airplanes, the newfangled technology of the day, were used to scour the deserts.
A British vice consul in Mexico described Villa as "a dog in rabies, a mad mullah, a Malay running amok."
Eighty-five years later, the rhetoric is familiar and the final outcome may well be too.
Villa was assassinated, possibly with U.S. help, in 1923.
Flight:
One air captain instructs passengers to gang up on any hijackers.
Others say they'll keep weapons close at hand.
Reflecting a more sober era of airline travel, some flight crews are urging passengers to resist hijackers, and some pilots are even vowing to keep knives, flashlights or other weapons handy.
Take, for example, the United Airlines captain on a Denver-to-Washington flight Saturday.
He reportedly told passengers that 200 passengers far outnumber any hijacking team, and that the Declaration of Independence begins with "We, the People."
The monologue took passenger Peter Hannaford, a public policy consultant from Washington, by surprise. "
Remember, there will be one of him and maybe a few confederates, but there are 200 of you," Hannaford recalled the captain saying.
The captain urged passengers to stand up immediately and begin throwing shoes, pillows or anything handy at a would-be hijacker, then toss a blanket over him and hold him down until the plane lands, Hannaford said.
Passengers applauded loudly at the announcement, Hannaford recalled.
"There was a palpable sense of relief," he said.
"I don't think there was anyone who didn't clap."
United Airlines is investigating the announcement, versions of which were circulated on the Internet by people identifying themselves as passengers on United Flight 564 from Denver to Washington's Dulles Airport.
On American Airlines Flight 4 from Los Angeles to New York's Kennedy International Airport, Capt.
Kevin Hart adopted a stern tone.
"The curtain between first class and business should be considered impenetrable for all but uniformed flight crew," Hart warned passengers last weekend. "
Seat belts will be buckled at all times except when you need to use the lavatory.
This is mandatory.
There will no longer be any wandering in the aisles."
One Dallas-based Delta Air Lines pilot, who asked to remain anonymous, said he will keep a pocketknife at the ready.
"My Leatherman will be out with the knife exposed . . .
within hand's reach," he said.
If he can't keep the blade out, the pilot said, he has already practiced unfolding it in an emergency.
"It took me seven seconds."
Veteran pilots were not surprised by the tenor of the announcements or by pilots' vows to arm themselves.
"We're in a transition period," said John Mazor, spokesman for the Airline Pilots Assn.
"The old procedures--which were very effective against old-style hijackings--they went out the window because they're really not effective against this kind of attack."
The old instructions to "accommodate, negotiate and do not escalate" don't apply to a hijacker bent on death, Mazor said.
The pilots association, which represents 66,000 commercial pilots nationwide, endorses installation of stronger cockpit doors with better locks.
"Nothing is off the table at this point," said Terry McVenes, the group's executive director of safety.
"Guns for pilots are not off the table."
Short of guns, other measures are being considered.
"One guy said he was going to lock the cockpit door during the whole flight and have the flight attendants heat his meals and bring them forward before the passengers board," said one veteran who flies Boeing 737s out of Los Angeles.
"Another guy said he was going to urinate in a bottle instead of going back to the lavatory.
That seems a little excessive to me.
"I know a guy who's taking the crash ax and putting it on top of his flight bag, right next to him, so it will be there if he needs it," said the pilot, who did not want to be identified.
Major airlines report that many pilots are sticking to previous routines, limiting flight announcements to destination, cruising altitude and air speed.
Even Southwest Airlines, famed for its offbeat announcements, has been subdued.
"We're discontinuing humorous public announcements," Wayne Stamps, vice president of the Southwest Airline Pilots Assn., said Thursday.
A Southwest spokeswoman said there is no official policy on the announcements, which are left to the crew's discretion.
One crew opted to stick with humor.
Emerging from a Southwest flight at Ontario Airport, Lisa Nielsen of Washington said an attendant had urged anyone wishing to smoke during the flight to step outside the aircraft.
Such levity, however, is rare.
"We're staying in the cockpit.
But we're also really looking at the passengers as they come on," the veteran pilot said as he passed through the security checkpoint in Burbank Airport on Thursday morning.
"We're taking a lot more interest.
Myself, I want to look them in the eye.
I want to know who's on my plane."   
Times staff writers Nita Lelyveld, Eric Malnic, Phil Willon and Ricardo Alonso-Zaldivar contributed to this story.
CNN said Tuesday it has submitted six questions to an intermediary claiming to represent Osama bin Laden, after being approached late last week with the idea through Al Jazeera.
The Qatar-based pan-Arab television network has been used in the past as a conduit for Bin Laden's statements. 
The cable news network added, however, that it did not plan to air the videotaped answers from the suspected terrorist mastermind in their entirety, if indeed a tape is returned. 
The network took pains to say that it had agreed to no conditions from anyone, including whether it would even use the answers in any form at all.
And CNN said it had no idea where Bin Laden is or how the questions and tape will be exchanged. 
A CNN spokeswoman declined to comment on whether it had alerted the White House to the negotiations or the possible interview. 
Last week, the White House asked all the TV networks to consider not airing messages from Bin Laden and his Al Qaeda organization in full because they were propaganda and might carry embedded messages to Bin Laden followers.
The networks agreed to screen all such videos before deciding what and how much to air. 
Anchor Wolf Blitzer said on CNN: "By submitting our questions, we are making no commitment to air Bin Laden's response.
We will look at the tape, if there is a tape, and decide how much or how little to run." 
The network also promised to immediately share any video answers with its competitors.
That is a policy reversal from last week when U.S. airstrikes in Afghanistan started and CNN attempted to maintain a six-hour exclusive on pictures coming out of Kabul from Al Jazeera, with which CNN has a video-sharing arrangement.
Other TV news organizations disregarded CNN's embargo, citing the pictures' newsworthiness. 
On the possibility of a Bin Laden interview, CNN's competitors took a wait-and-see attitude. 
"We welcome the fact that they would share it and we'll look at it and make an evaluation," said a CBS News spokeswoman. 
NBC and ABC said they would discuss airing it.
Fox News Channel said it doesn't know enough about the situation to comment. 
Representatives for the other TV news organizations said they did not believe their reporters had received similar approaches from Al Qaeda. 
Among the questions submitted to Bin Laden, CNN said, is a request for details on his role in the Sept. 11 attacks and subsequent "anthrax attacks" in the U.S.
In addition, CNN asked Bin Laden to explain how he and his followers can advocate killing innocent people and how they respond to criticism from other Muslim and Arab leaders. 
It also asked whether any of the Sept. 11 hijackers or accomplices receive Al Qaeda financial support or training, whether any other government or organization was involved, whether Bin Laden and his followers have weapons of mass destruction and if so, whether they plan to use them. 
The network said it has no idea when it might hear back.
A prolonged shutdown of air travel and cargo systems could severely affect the economy.
Tighter security is expected to be imposed.
The skies above the nation emptied and all U.S. airports were closed for the first time in history, after the simultaneous hijackings of four commercial jetliners at the heart of Tuesday's terrorist attacks.
The Bush administration said it was continuing a virtual ban on air travel today until the safety of passengers could be ensured.
Transportation Secretary Norman Mineta told reporters he could give neither a time nor a date for full resumption of air service.
He said it was decided to indefinitely postpone full restoration of service after aviation officials discussed security problems with the FBI and intelligence agencies.
Mineta did say passengers stranded in flights amid Tuesday's terrorist attacks would be allowed to fly to their original destinations.
But the general grounding of flights continues, he emphasized. 
When flights resume, passengers won't be able to check their bags at the curb, they will be subjected to random checks, they will see more uniformed security and they should arrive even earlier.
Mineta said he is acting to augment airline security after Tuesday's terrorist attacks in New York City and Washington, which began with the hijacking of four commercial airliners.
"There will be higher levels of surveillance, more stringent searches," Mineta said.
"Travelers may experience some inconveniences, but we ask for your patience.
We must do whatever it takes with safety as our highest priority."
The FAA advises passengers to call their airlines before going to the airport, to make sure flights are taking off on time.
Many pilots did not finish their runs on Tuesday, choosing instead to land at the nearest airport after the FAA halted all plane traffic.
On Tuesday, an air travel system that normally moves 1.5 million people on more than 40,000 commercial and chartered U.S. flights was brought to a standstill, as the more than 5,000 jets that crisscross the country were grounded by the FAA as a precaution in case of other attacks.
Federal authorities also quickly diverted hundreds of international flights bound for the U.S. to airports elsewhere, mainly in Canada.
Airlines in Asia, Europe and other continents suspended service to the United States.
Los Angeles International Airport was closed and evacuated.
Amtrak rail service and Greyhound bus operations also were halted, mainly in the Northeast.
"The airline transportation system as we knew it died as of 9 a.m.
New York time," when the second hijacked jetliner plowed into the World Trade Center, said Michael Boyd, president of aviation consulting firm Boyd Group in Evergreen, Colo.
Air travelers' "ability to walk through a simple security system run by people who don't know security is gone," he said.
The astonishing shutdown of air travel provided one of the most tangible ways that Americans across the country felt a direct ripple effect of the attacks on the East Coast.
Not only could countless numbers of travelers not fly, but thousands of others also found themselves landing in cities other than their destinations, as the FAA ordered en route jets to land at the nearest airport.
Any prolonged shutdown of the air travel system and the resultant disruption of business and leisure travel and cargo flights could cause serious harm to the U.S. economy.
On Tuesday, aircraft flown by the U.S. Postal Service and cargo carriers such as United Parcel Service and FedEx--which move the nation's mail and billions of dollars in goods around the country daily--also were grounded by the FAA.
The airline industry and the airports--notably LAX--quickly became a focal point of the nightmarish tragedy, owing to the terrorists' use of four commercial jetliners to carry out the suicide missions.
All four were flying to California, and together they carried more than 260 people.
American Airlines, the nation's largest airline, confirmed that two of its flights were seized and used in the attacks.
Flight 11, a Boeing 767 flying from Boston to Los Angeles, was one of the jetliners that hit the World Trade Center towers in New York.
The other American Airlines plane that was hijacked was Flight 77, a Boeing 757 flying from Washington's Dulles Airport to Los Angeles.
That aircraft was the one that crashed into the Pentagon.
United Airlines also lost two jetliners.
Flight 175 from Boston's Logan Airport to Los Angeles, a 767, was the other jetliner that slammed into the World Trade Center.
United Flight 93, a 757 en route to San Francisco from Newark, N.J., crashed 80 miles southeast of Pittsburgh.
"We are horrified by these tragic events," said Donald Carty, chairman of American Airlines.
Stifling LAX's operations alone, even for a short while, could have a huge effect on Southern California.
It is the world's third-busiest airport in terms of passengers handled--more than 200,000 people a day, who come and go via 100,000 cars and scores of shuttles, vans and other vehicles--and its annual economic contribution to the region amounts to more than $60 billion.
"When the airports open, it is really going to be worse than any major storm because every airport has been closed," said Terry Trippler, president of consulting firm Trippler & Associates in Minneapolis.
"My gut feeling is that it will take until this weekend for everything to get back to normal as far as air travel is concerned," he said.
Others said there could be widespread fear among consumers about flying again soon, which could further cripple the airline industry.
The shutdown also could hurt the car rental agencies, which do most of their business at airports, although there were reports that many stranded passengers descended on the firms Tuesday as they scrambled for alternative transportation.
It's "already a tough year for the car rental industry, and this could be devastating," said Jon LeSage, research director at Abrams Travel Data Services in Long Beach.
Moreover, Mondays through Wednesdays are the biggest rental days because of heavy business travel, he said.
Mary Jersin, a spokeswoman for Hong Kong-based Cathay Pacific Airways, said that the carrier had eight U.S.-bound flights either diverted to Vancouver, Canada, or canceled and that it called off four more that were scheduled to leave Hong Kong after midnight early today.
Jetliners also lined up on the tarmacs of Canadian airports after U.S. airspace was closed, and passengers emerged stunned by events south of the border.
Lee Manchen of Detroit, a passenger heading home on a Northwest Airlines flight from Tokyo, said the pilot announced that mechanical problems had forced him to divert the plane to Vancouver.
The pilot later apologized, Manchen said, for not telling the truth, saying, "It was the worst day of our lives, and he would remember it forever."
American Airlines pilot Larry McCalley, 58, of Mission Viejo arrived at Orange County's John Wayne Airport expecting to work.
But he, like other pilots, was sent home.
McCalley said that until about 10 months ago, American's ill-fated Flight 11 was his flight.
"It just seems a shame that the world has to come to this--all the victims," McCalley said, visibly stunned.
"You think about it
but you look at the probability of something like this happening, but you don't really expect it."
John Wayne Airport officials closed that facility about 9 a.m., although few members of the public were there at the time.
No flights had taken off, and about 20 jets sat empty and silent at their gates or on the tarmac.
Yolanda Perez, a spokeswoman for the airport, said the facility's secured areas had been evacuated about 7 a.m.--
the time the first flights leave John Wayne--and cars were barred from parking curbside and security was increased.
The airport normally handles about 270 departures and arrivals daily involving about 6,000 passengers.
Xavier Jorquiera, 41, of Rancho Santa Margarita was aboard an American Airlines flight to Mexico City about 6 a.m. when the order came to evacuate the plane, which was still on the ground.
He wasn't told the reason until passengers were back in the terminal.
"It's horrible.
It's a tragedy," he said.
Boyd, the independent airline analyst, blamed the extent of the damage square on the FAA, charging that the agency has allowed security to be lax at passenger check-in points around major airports.
"The airport perimeters at many airports have been sieves, and the FAA has done nothing about it," he said.
FAA officials could not be immediately reached to respond.
Travel and airline experts said the tragic events could result in devastating short-term losses for the major U.S. carriers and may lead to higher ticket prices as the companies pass on to consumers the costs of tightened security measures.
The new security clearances that passengers will face are expected "to be quite draconian," said Steve Alterman, president of the Cargo Air Line Assn.
, an industry trade group in Washington.
"We must try to get back to normal business as quickly as we can, just to show these terrorists that they can't shut us down--although they have for at least one day," Alterman said.
"But the new airport security will slow things down."
Several experts said many airlines' contracts would require them to offer full refunds to travelers who fear flying in the wake of the terrorist attacks, and they predicted that airlines would see a drop-off in ticket sales to the tune of hundreds of millions of dollars.
The tragedy Tuesday is known as a force majeure incident beyond the airlines' control.
In such cases, travelers are entitled to a refund or to accept what alternate flights the airlines offer, Trippler said.
American Airlines said it was trying every means possible to get diverted passengers to their destinations or to put them in hotels until air travel resumes.
The airlines also said they will work with passengers to accommodate flight changes.
Midwest Express, for example, said it will waive change fees and refund rules for those scheduled to travel until Monday.
The Milwaukee-based airline said travelers could extend their travel dates for up to one year from the date of ticket issue.
Jersin of Cathay Pacific said that the airline had not received a lot of cancellations, but that any passengers fearful of flying could exchange their tickets without paying a penalty.
"There probably will be people that will not want to fly for a while, and we're very flexible as far as that," she said.
Aaron Gellman, a professor at the Transportation Center at Northwestern University, said the overall effect on the economy could be devastating.
"The airlines are the most vulnerable and would be most affected by this," Gellman said.
"It's impossible to predict with any precision what's going to happen.
This is a very important, watershed event."
Parsons said the attacks could lead to a wholesale review of security measures, particularly those applied to domestic travelers.
"I think in America, we've never had the true fear of travel, like you do in Tel Aviv.
Look at El Al," Parsons said, referring to the Israeli airline. "
They may inspect your bag three times before it gets on the plane.
You go to Europe; you see the dogs and the guns in the airports.
I think high security we've talked about, we've had opportunities to bring in good equipment, but we've never spent the money on it, not on the domestic side."
But he noted that the terrorists who attacked key targets Tuesday evidently didn't need to smuggle bombs aboard planes to inflict unimaginable damage.
A multi-ton airliner is "better than any weapon I can think of," Parsons said.
"With these planes and their fuel tanks full, you had a flying bomb."
Travel experts suggested that a permanent increase in airline security has been long overdue.
"In the past, passengers continuously have agreed in surveys that they would pay more for security," consultant Trippler said.
"How much more remains to be seen.
They've never been told how much more.
Will they pay $10 a ticket, $5 a ticket?
We as consumers have done a lot of complaining on airline lines, but we may have to go back to where everyone is checked in" in person without such timesavers as electronic ticketing.
Greyhound ceased scheduled bus service in the Northeast, and 30 terminals throughout the country temporarily suspended service, including East Los Angeles, San Diego and Sacramento.
The terminals were closed because of their proximity to airports and federal buildings, Greyhound spokeswoman Kristin Parsley said.
Like other airlines, Japan's All Nippon Airways was scrambling Tuesday to figure out how to handle the hundreds of passengers who were being diverted all over North America in search of a safe haven.
Thomas Fredo, an ANA spokesman in New York, said four flights headed for New York, Washington, Los Angeles and San Francisco were diverted to either Vancouver or Detroit.
He said those passengers were likely to spend the night there while officials await further word on when U.S. airspace would reopen.
Fredo, who works in Rockefeller Center, four or five miles north of the World Trade Center, said the attack was horrific.
"I don't have anything to compare this to," he said.
"The only thing this vaguely reminds me of is the day John F. Kennedy was shot."   
Times staff writers Evelyn Iritani and Kathleen Brady in Los Angeles and Kimi Yoshino, John O'Dell and Marc Ballon in Orange County contributed to this story.
Times wire services also contributed. 
Huge plumes of smoke billowed into the air above the hilly battle lines, and commanders' radios crackled with urgent messages.
It was another day on the northern front outside Mazar-e-Sharif, a Taliban-held city on the windy steppes of northern Afghanistan.
Over weeks, months, even years, opposition forces had repeatedly claimed they were on the verge of seizing the city, a vital crossroads and strategic prize.
They said so again on that day  Thursday, Nov. 8.
"We will take Mazar-e-Sharif, maybe tomorrow," declared a rebel spokesman, Ashraf Nadeem.
Familiar words -- but this time, they were true.
The chain of events about to be set in motion would irrevocably alter the course of the U.S.-led military campaign launched in response to the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
Up until then, a month of relentless aerial bombardment -- much of it directed against Taliban air defenses around the cities -- had failed to loosen the Taliban grip on power.
Battle lines in the north had barely budged.
And American airstrikes had failed to inflict serious injury on the tight inner circle of Osama bin Laden, whose terror network was believed to be behind the Sept. 11 attacks.
All that was about to change.
In 10 tumultuous days, the Taliban lost two-thirds of their territory and saw many of the trappings of government fall into the hands of their bitterest enemies, the opposition northern alliance.
Forced to flee city after city, Taliban troops and bin Laden fighters abandoned the capital Kabul in the dead of night, harried by strikes from the air and U.S. special forces on the ground.
Ordinary Afghans, furious over five years of repressive rule, mutilated the corpses of unlucky Taliban stragglers left behind.
One of bin Laden's most trusted lieutenants was killed in a U.S. raid.
The Taliban were reported to be haggling with tribal leaders over terms of a possible surrender of their home base and spiritual center, Kandahar.
Even by the standards of a regime that had made brutal intimidation its byword, this was a hard, fast fall.
From Kandahar they came, and to there the Taliban returned.
As more and more territory slipped from their grasp, the desert city  together with remote mountain hide-outs and the northern city of Kunduz -- became their last real stronghold.
Five years ago, Kandahar was the wellspring of the austere Islamic movement whose name simply meant "students."
At first, the Taliban appeared to some to be a welcome contrast to corrupt warlords whose infighting had left the capital in ruins  this on the heels of a bloody decade-long struggle against Soviet occupation.
But as the Taliban hold on the country tightened, the brand of Islam it imposed became more and more severe -- for many Afghans, unbearably so.
Women could not work or leave their homes unless swathed in face- and body-covering veils.
Men were forced to wear beards as long as a fist and go to prayers five times a day.
Television and music were banned.
The religious edicts mounted:
No kite-flying.
No chess-playing.
No pigeon-keeping.
Drought, hunger and isolation from the outside world added to the misery.
It was the Taliban's sheltering of bin Laden, though, that triggered the confrontation with the United States.
With camps scattered across Afghanistan, bin Laden and his al-Qaida followers -- euphemistically referred to as "guests"  entrenched themselves not only in the landscape, but in the power structure, becoming closely intertwined with the Taliban leadership.
Al-Qaida means "base," and investigators believed Afghanistan was just that for bin Laden's far-flung, loosely linked terror network.
The U.S.-led air war was launched Oct. 7, after the Taliban ignored an American ultimatum to hand over bin Laden or face destruction.
By week's end, the latter appeared to be suddenly staring them in the face.
The turning point in the campaign for Mazar-e-Sharif was a change in U.S. tactics: devastating airstrikes on Taliban front lines, directed by U.S. special forces on the ground and including the largest non-nuclear bombs in the American arsenal.
Waves of B-52 bombers, visible only as jet trails in the sky, transformed the hills into vast infernos, with smoke and fire covering the landscape.
Dreams of holy war vanished in the flames.
Mazar-e-Sharif's defenses crumbled as the first alliance troops crossed the Pul-i-Imam Bukhri bridge leading into the heart of the city.
Despite the drama of the moment, few imagined that events would move so swiftly in the aftermath.
By last weekend, opposition troops were already marching south toward Kabul after seizing large swaths of northern territory, including four provincial capitals.
Nervous Taliban troops set up checkpoints at key intersections in the capital, stopping vehicles, searching passengers, looking for possible infiltrators.
Punishing American airstrikes on Taliban positions north of the capital helped alliance forces break through outer Taliban defenses  even as President Bush and British Prime Minister Tony Blair expressed hopes that the alliance would stop short of entering Kabul.
In territory that had changed hands earlier, grim reports of reprisal killings emerged, fueling international concern.
In Mazar-e-Sharif, the United Nations said, more than 100 Taliban fighters trapped in the city after its fall were killed by northern alliance fighters after they sought refuge in a school.
Many ordinary people in Kabul -- even those who longed to throw off the Taliban yoke -- feared that the arrival of the northern alliance would signal the start of infighting among various warlords, reminiscent of the savage civil war of the early 1990s.
By Monday night, though, the momentum was unstoppable.
With shouts of "God is great!"
opposition forces pushed their way to the gates of the capital.
Before dawn, under cover of darkness, the bulk of the Taliban fled, heading south toward Kandahar.
As day broke and Kabul's people ventured outdoors, word of the Taliban retreat spread like wildfire.
People shouted congratulations to one another, honking car horns and ringing the bells of bicycles.
Bands of northern alliance troops roamed the city, hunting down stragglers.
Some of those captured escaped with only a beating, but others suffered a worse fate.
The bodies of several dozen Taliban fighters lay in ditches, battered where they lay by sticks and stones.
Some corpses, in a final insult, had nearly worthless Afghani bank notes stuffed into their noses -- an Afghan way of implying an enemy is corrupt.
By week's end, the focus had shifted back to Kandahar, where complex negotiations were said to be under way among tribal factions and Taliban leaders for a Taliban retreat from the city of their movement's birth.
Mullah Mohammed Omar, the Taliban leader, was at one point reported to have struck a deal to abandon the city and head for the mountains.
But that later appeared to break down amid differences not only between the two sides, but between the two sides' competing factions.
Pakistani authorities tightened border controls, fearing an influx of Taliban if the fighters were forced out of Kandahar.
In Kabul, people were still savoring newfound freedoms -- even though fears for the future had dampened initial euphoria.
Barber shops were still crowded with men having their beards cut off.
The Taliban's Radio Shariat -- named for Islamic law that the Taliban so rigorously upheld -- had been renamed Radio Afghanistan.
Once-forbidden music wafted from loudspeakers and tinny-sounding cassette players.
A 40-year-old janitor named Abdul Shukur stroked the beard he was about to shave off.
"We're being reborn in the world," he declared.
Airlines imposed drastic cutbacks today in an effort to avoid bankruptcy after last week's terrorist attacks, with three major carriers slicing schedules by 20 percent and Continental Airlines furloughing one-fifth of its work force.
The industry, already hurting because of the economic slowdown, is expected to lose billions of dollars before the end of the year.
Analysts say that without a huge bailout from the federal government, even the largest carriers could go out of business.
"These actions are a direct result of the current and anticipated adverse effects on the demand for air travel caused by this week's terrorist attacks on the United States," Continental said in a statement.
The airline said the costs of dramatically increased security requirements also forced it to cut back.
Houston-based Continental is the nation's fifth-largest airline and has more than 56,000 employees on its payroll.
"I guess everybody in the airline industry's had anxiety over this, so it's not totally unexpected," said Jim Moody, spokesman for the Independent Association of Continental Pilots, which represents 7,500 pilots for the airline.
American Airlines and Northwest also said they would run 20 percent fewer flights than they did before Tuesday's attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon.
Neither carrier specified how many jobs would be affected by their service cuts.
Minneapolis-based Northwest, the fourth-largest carrier, made the change today and said it would complete a review of its staffing needs by next week.
American, based in Fort Worth, Texas, was the first company to announce scaled-back service.
"In light of the schedule reduction, Northwest is reviewing its overall staffing and other resource needs.
The airline will complete this review next week," the statement said.
Analysts predict the industry will lose between $4 billion and $7 billion in 2001 because of the public's increased fear of flying, the shutdown in air travel over the past few days and the fewer flights and higher costs associated with new airport security measures.
Congress gave President Bush $40 billion today without hesitation to help rebuild from this week's terrorist attacks carried out by hijacked jetliners.
Bush will be able to spend half that amount with virtually no congressional restrictions, although it was unclear how much of that might be allocated for the airline industry.
"The airlines simply won't be able to do what they're being asked to do without financial support," said Helane Becker, an analyst at Buckingham Research in New York.
The Teamsters union is working with airlines officials to set a meeting with President Bush, possibly on Tuesday, to pursue an emergency appropriations package for the airlines that would help prevent a "ripple effect" after Continental's announcement, union president James Hoffa said.
The nation's nine largest carriers have been losing between $100 million and $250 million per day since the nation's air space was shut down and then gradually reopened following Tuesday's events.
"To put that figure into perspective, we had estimated a $400 million net loss for the industry's third quarter before Tuesday's horrific events," Higgins said.
Also today, Boston's Logan Airport, where hijackers boarded the planes that destroyed the World Trade Center, reopened with officers in black SWAT uniforms and police dogs on patrol.
Travel at other airports continued to creep back into service.
Travelers across the country faced long lines and delays as airports implemented mandatory federal security measures, including a ban on curbside check-in and limited access to ticketed passengers beyond security screening points.
With the reopening of Logan, Reagan National Airport at Washington was the only major U.S. airport still closed to travel.
Federal authorities said its proximity to the Pentagon and other federal buildings created enough security concern to keep it closed for now.
Federal officials also reopened the skies to most private planes, but banned them from flying within about 30 miles of Washington, D.C., and New York City.
A Rutgers University professor finds himself "troubled and embarrassed" as his rather obscure 1999 book on the World Trade Center's twin towers zooms up Amazon.com's bestseller list.
And Regnery Publishing Inc. debates whether to call off printing CNN commentator Barbara Olson's book on the last days of the Clinton administration.
Olson was a passenger on the plane that smashed into the Pentagon.
As of Saturday, three of the 10 top-selling books on Amazon.com had to do with the prophecies of 14th century astrologer Nostradamus.
The top 10 also included two works on the World Trade Center, one on terrorism, one on biological weapons and a yet-to-be-published book on Osama bin Laden.
Meanwhile, many authors of terrorist-themed thrillers are having inner debates about the moral implications of what they write.
Said John J. Nance, author of "Blackout" (Putnam, 2000), whose plot centers on a devastating explosion aboard a jumbo jet, "I don't want any terrorist cell handing around my book as an instruction manual" and causing "the death of innocent people.
" In fact, Nance said, he recently abandoned a "promising plot line" for a novel because he believed it would inspire terrorists.
Nance, author of 12 books with hijacking plots, said writers have a responsibility not to pursue certain plot lines.
But the reality, he said, now that a horrible scenario has played out, is that authors will soon be exploring parallel themes, maybe even upping the story ante, to cash in.
"Everyone's in a state of paralysis" in the publishing world, said Nora Rawlinson, editor in chief of Publishers Weekly.
She noted a rise in sales of books about Islam and terrorism and photographic books about New York and the twin towers.
September traditionally is when publishers release their blockbusters, but many promotional tours are on hold.
Book Soup in West Hollywood postponed a book signing Saturday by actress Anne Heche ("Call Me Crazy") until October.
Barnes & Noble canceled all promotional events nationwide through today.
Salman Rushdie canceled appearances in Vancouver and Toronto to promote his New York-based novel, "Fury."
A spokeswoman for Knopf Canada said Rushdie is devastated by Tuesday's tragedy.
At Dutton's Bookstore in Brentwood, customers were asking for books they hoped would help explain such things as the Middle Eastern mind-set and the worldview of America.
Among these were Chalmers Johnson's "Blowback: The Costs and Consequences of American Empire" and Judith Miller's
"God Has Ninety-Nine Names
: Reporting From a Militant Middle East."
At Amazon.com's online bookstore, rising bestsellers included John Hogue's "Nostradamus: The Complete Prophecies," which many say includes a vision of a major Western city's destruction.
Boston-based Northeastern University Press was taken by surprise by the demand for Simon Reeve's 1999 book "The New Jackals: Ramzi Yousef, Osama bin Laden and the Future of Terrorism."
Associate director Jill Bahcall said that, with 5,000 copies in print, "we ran out early Wednesday morning" and that 15,000 more are being printed.
Reached in London, Reeve noted that a critic at the time of his book's publishing had accused him of "scaremongering" by predicting an apocalyptic terrorist attack.
He said sudden interest in his book has "left a nasty taste in the mouth.
It's not as though I'd written it in the last couple of days to capitalize on what happened."
HarperCollins reported renewed interest in the paperback of Harold S. Kushner's "When Bad Things Happen to Good People," an inspirational book on healing.
A spokeswoman said the publisher plans early this week to deliver copies of the book to victims' families in Manhattan.
St. Martin's Press was grappling with what to do about the scheduled November publication of "Plane Insanity" by Elliott Hester, a humorous steward's-eye view of jet travel.
And Regnery Publishing is debating publishing Olson's "The Final Days."
"We were all set to go to press this week," said president-publisher Alfred Regnery.
"We've delayed it for a week.
It's very likely we will go forward."
Rutgers University's Angus Kress Gillespie was ambivalent about his newfound success with "Twin Towers: The Life of New York City's World Trade Center," published in 1999 with a run of 3,000.
"Up until Monday, it had sold 2,000.
By Tuesday noon, the remaining 1,000 were gone," and Rutgers University Press is quickly printing 18,000 more.
From his home in New Brunswick, N.J., Gillespie, a professor of American studies, said he, too, has mixed feelings about overnight success. "
On the one hand, I'm proud of the book.
I hope it will serve as a tribute to the victims of the disaster.
As a human being, I'm troubled and embarrassed by the circumstances of the celebrity status of the book." 
After weeks of behind-the-scenes maneuvering, New York Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani on Wednesday gave up a campaign to run for a third term and help the city cope with the World Trade Center disaster. 
The mayor, who had publicly risen above politics in the days after the attacks and won international praise for his leadership, conceded that his efforts to suspend the city's term limit law and seek another four years in office would be "divisive."
He feared it would spur litigation at a time when New York needs to heal. 
Giuliani also backed away from a bid to extend his second term by 90 days, saying that while it would help the next mayor adjust to the gargantuan task of recovery, he would not actively pursue the idea. 
"Maybe I was in a different world" in hoping that the bid to stay on could have steered clear of politics, Giuliani said Wednesday.
But critics say the mayor's setback was yet another example of how his ambitions and abrasive style marred what should have been a moment of great personal triumph. 
"There are two sides to this guy and they always seem to be battling each other, very publicly," said biographer Wayne Barrett, who has studied the Republican mayor.
"In many ways, he just can't help it.
For every good thing that he does, he always finds a way to provoke criticism." 
Simply put, there's Giuliani the leader and Giuliani the divider. 
The leader rose to the occasion Sept. 11, comforting grief-stricken New Yorkers and rallying emergency forces to a scene of horror.
Even Giuliani's worst enemies praised him effusively, and many said the combative and caustic mayor had finally won the citywide adulation that had eluded him during eight years in office. 
But Giuliani the divider squandered much of that goodwill, especially among political insiders, when word leaked out last week that he was asking mayoral candidates to make a tough decision: either extend his term by 90 days, or he would try to run for a third term. 
"This is about the city; it's not ideological, it's not personal and it's not political," said the 57-year-old mayor, refusing to concede that his proposals might trigger a political firestorm among his enemies.
"If they state and city legislators can work it out, God bless 'em." 
Two mayoral candidates--Democrat Mark Green, the public advocate, and Republican media mogul Michael Bloomberg--agreed to the 90-day extension.
But Bronx Borough President Fernando Ferrer, a Democrat seeking to become the city's first Latino mayor, refused.
He said Giuliani's request was undemocratic. 
Green and Ferrer will meet in a runoff Oct. 11, and the vote may well turn into a referendum on how New Yorkers feel about giving Giuliani more time in office.
While many voters give the mayor high marks, harsh critics are surfacing. 
Last week, on a day when 16 New York City firefighters were buried, the grief and solemnity were shattered by rancor over the mayor's fight to stay on at City Hall.
The mayor's demand for more time "is an insult to the compassion and integrity of New Yorkers who worked so hard," said the Rev. Al Sharpton.
"We would have come together if Bozo was the mayor." 
Even some of the mayor's closest allies, such as state Senate Majority Leader Joseph Bruno, had refused to aggressively back his request to suspend term limits.
One observer, a Giuliani confidant, said that "he's made a horrible mistake by coming on so strong.
He could have left office like a genuine hero, he could have written his own ticket.
But now he's been sullied with politics." 
This week, the mayor's personal approval ratings soared to 91%, according to the Quinnipiac poll, and when he spoke before the United Nations General Assembly, Secretary-General Kofi Annan dubbed him "Mayor of the World." 
But in the same poll, New Yorkers opposed the idea of giving Giuliani a third term by a 55% to 39% margin.
"They clearly don't want the rules of an election changed at the last minute," said pollster Lee Miringoff. 
So how could a man riding so high--a public official with such overwhelming support--make such a big political miscalculation? 
"Giuliani is a person who not only likes to think of himself in control, he has to be totally in control," said John Mollenkopf, professor of political science at the City University of New York Graduate School.
"He has a primal need to be running things, to stay in the driver's seat, and it has become obvious that he really didn't want to give up the stage." 
Some observers say Giuliani's bid to stay on and help the city through a difficult mayoral transition was scuttled by old enemies.
He needed support from the City Council and the state Legislature to suspend the city's term limit law, yet black and Latino leaders vowed that would never happen, citing years of friction and bitter clashes with him. 
"Politics is a two-way process," said Roger Green, chairman of the state Legislature's black, Hispanic and Puerto Rican caucus.
"This man hasn't returned our phone calls for eight years.
Why do him a favor?" 
Others insist Giuliani was his own worst enemy, wrecking a moment of victory just as he has so many times before.
In a city where shellshocked people are being urged to resume their daily lives, they say, the sight of Giuliani wrestling with his demons may be the most normal sign of all. 
"I blame him directly for this" political impasse, Richard Goldstein, a Village Voice columnist, said on a local television news show. "
He personally created a situation where blacks and Latinos in New York dislike him so much, they wouldn't let him stay in office an extra day." 
Still others blame Giuliani's setback on zealous staff members, who follow his wishes absolutely. 
"You can sympathize with their aides' concerns, because they didn't want to wake up on Jan. 1 and find they are no longer the center of the universe," said a veteran New York political consultant who asked not to be identified.
"They tried to win approval behind the scenes and people at City Hall were offended.
These aides clearly were doing Rudy's bidding." 
On the day before the World Trade Center attacks, Giuliani was a lame-duck mayor searching in vain for a legacy.
He was the butt of jokes, forced out of Gracie Mansion--the mayor's official residence--and living in a bachelor pad with two gay men as he fought a nasty divorce battle with his wife.
He seemed marginalized and unfocused, a man used to being the center of attention who was slowly losing his audience. 
Giuliani had hoped his legacy would be crowned with new baseball and football stadiums.
They are not likely to be built now, given the city's grave financial condition.
Yet veteran observers say his true legacy will be forever rooted in the rubble of the World Trade Center, and in the hearts of New Yorkers who finally saw him display genuine compassion for others. 
"It was an amazing epiphany for him, that disaster," said former Mayor Edward I. Koch, a harsh Giuliani critic.
"We saw a side of him that was extraordinary.
And then boom!
He reverts to type, like he always does." 
During eight years in office, Giuliani won kudos for presiding over New York City's stunning drop in crime.
Yet he was vilified for seeming to dismiss minority complaints about police brutality.
Critics said he showed great insensitivity toward innocent black victims killed by police. 
The mayor made headlines around the world in his efforts to make New York a more civil place; he cracked down on squeegee men, porn shop owners, street vendors, rude taxi drivers, litterers and even jaywalkers.
But he embarrassed many by leaking unsavory details of his divorce.
The story played out in court and on the front pages, repelling many. 
Giuliani won great sympathy last year when he revealed that he had prostate cancer, a setback that caused him to abandon a projected U.S. Senate race against Hillary Rodham Clinton.
But even that moment was marred by subsequent disclosures that he had a girlfriend, Judith Nathan.
New Yorkers might not have begrudged him his private life, but he flaunted the relationship, taking public nighttime strolls with Nathan while his wife, Donna Hanover, was home with their two children. 
Giuliani has made no apologies for his rough, take-no-prisoners style; he's often joked that his personality was molded by the experience of growing up as a Yankee fan in Brooklyn, where the rival Dodgers used to play.
Bright and ambitious, he was drawn to the law and eventually became the U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York.
He gained a national reputation as a crime-busting crusader against Mafia chieftains, crooked Wall Street traders and corrupt cops. 
Giuliani ran for mayor in 1989, narrowly losing to David Dinkins, the city's first African American mayor.
He won a hard-fought rematch four years later, and was easily reelected in 1997. 
In the coming weeks, Giuliani will have an opportunity to repair any public relations damage by focusing on the recovery and forgoing any further thoughts of staying in office, said Mollenkopf. 
"People will thank him," Mollenkopf said.
"But they're also saying, 'We're choosing a new leader, Rudy.
And it's time for you to move on.' "
An NBC News employee was infected with the skin form of anthrax after the network received mail containing a suspicious powder, authorities said today.
A network source said the envelope was addressed to anchorman Tom Brokaw. 
The anthrax is far less serious than the inhaled form of the disease, which killed a Florida man a week ago.
The NBC employee is being treated with antibiotics and is expected to recover, the network said. 
Barry Mawn, head of the FBI office in New York, said authorities "see no connection whatsoever" to the Sept. 11 attack on the World Trade Center.
The FBI is checking to see if there is a link to the Florida case, but "preliminarily I do not see that," Mawn said. 
The FBI has begun a criminal investigation to find the source of the anthrax in the New York case, Attorney General John Ashcroft said in Washington.
An investigation is also under way in Florida. 
Ashcroft said the letter to NBC postmarked Sept. 25 "may have transmitted the anthrax," but authorities stopped short of saying the mail was the source. 
The envelope "may have contained material contaminated with the spore-form of anthrax," according to a statement from the federal Centers for Disease Control. 
NBC said a test result confirming the infection at its Rockefeller Center headquarters came back this morning.
The infected woman is an assistant to Brokaw, network officials said on condition of anonymity.
One said Brokaw was being tested for anthrax. 
"Living in New York and working in this building for this company, you're already on edge," said Brian Rolapp, 29, a business development manager for NBC.
"But I think everyone is a little startled that it's this close to home." 
Skin and inhaled forms of anthrax are caused by the same bacterium.
The only difference is whether the microscopic spores enter the skin through a cut or if there are enough spores to be inhaled and thus cause infection through the lungs.
It takes more than 8,000 spores to cause the inhalation form of anthrax. 
Neither form can be spread directly from person to person. 
The first symptoms of skin-- or cutaneous-- anthrax are reddish-black sores on the exposed skin.
If the disease is caught at that point and treated with antibiotics it is easily cured.
Even without treatment, cutaneous anthrax is fatal in only one case out of 20. 
Officials advised people not to open or even shake any suspicious mail.
Instead, they should leave it alone and contact authorities. 
"Our nation is still in danger but the government is doing everything on our power to protect our citizenry," President Bush said during a White House event celebrating Hispanic heritage. 
"The American people need to go about their lives.
We cannot let terrorists lock our country down," he said.
"They will not take this country down." 
At a news conference in New York, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani said tests would be done at the NBC offices.
The third floor and one or two other parts of the 70-story GE Building at 30 Rockefeller Center were sealed off for federal health investigators.
Those areas of the building were cleared of employees. 
Brokaw, who attended the hastily called news conference, rubbed his eyes, wiped his brow and did not speak except when asked if the woman was his secretary.
"She is an employee of 'Nightly News,'" Brokaw replied. 
The infected woman has been treated with the antibiotic Cipro since Oct. 1, officials said.
The mayor said all employees exposed to the powder will be tested for anthrax and treated with Cipro. 
"People should not overreact to this," Giuliani said.
"Much of this is being done to allay people's fears." 
A spokeswoman for The New York Times said reporter Judith Miller had received an envelope containing a "powdery white substance.
" The substance was being tested by health authorities. 
Miller, who was formerly stationed in the Middle East, is co-author of the book
"Germ: Biological Weapons and America's Secret War." 
After the envelope arrived, employees were moved out of the third-floor newsroom to other areas in the building on West 43rd Street, spokeswoman Christine Mohan said. 
Air tests for radioactive and chemical substances were negative, she said.
She also said the substance smelled like talcum powder. 
The GE Building in midtown Manhattan, in addition to being the headquarters for NBC, is home to "Saturday Night Live" and "Late Night With Conan O'Brien."
Crowds milled around the front of the building and barricades were put up today, but no streets were closed. 
After receiving the mail last month, NBC said it immediately contacted the FBI, the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the New York Department of Health. 
"The mail was tested by these organizations, and the employee was treated by several physicians.
All these tests came back negative," NBC said today. "
However, this morning, a later test on the employee came back positive for traces of cutaneous anthrax." 
The disclosure came a week after a photo editor for The Sun supermarket tabloid in Boca Raton, Fla., died of inhaled form of anthrax.
The American Media Inc. building where several supermarket tabloids are published was sealed off after anthrax was also found on the keyboard of the editor, Bob Stevens, 63, and in the nasal passages of two co-workers. 
Traces of anthrax were later found in the American Media mailroom, authorities said.
The other two employees are taking antibiotics and one has returned to work. 
At an afternoon news conference in Florida, FBI special agent Hector Pesquera said test results of 965 people who were in the building recently have found no new infections.
A few test results were still pending. 
Investigators also tested 15 clerks who worked in the South Florida post office that handled American Media's mail, a union official said. 
EDITOR'S
NOTE-- Associated Press Television Writer David Bauder contributed to this report.
U.S. special forces have begun operations on the ground in Afghanistan, officials said today, opening a significant and dangerous new phase of the assault against the Taliban and terrorists. 
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said for the first time that the U.S. military is coordinating with anti-Taliban forces on the ground, providing food, ammunition and money. 
"There is good coordination from the air with the ground in some places, particularly in the north," Rumsfeld told reporters traveling with him to Whiteman Air Force Base in Missouri.
"There is not that kind of coordination as of yet in the south." 
A U.S. official said separately that U.S. special forces were supporting intelligence efforts to undermine the Taliban in southern Afghanistan.
The official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said military action could increase markedly in coming days. 
A Pakistani official, also not wanting to be identified, said Pakistan was told by the Americans that special forces were dropped into Taliban territory on Thursday. 
"Their basic purpose will not be to seize anything, but to conduct hit-and-run operations, pinpoint installations, smoke out terrorists," said the Pakistani military official. 
The official said U.S. forces have also been in anti-Taliban northern alliance territory of Afghanistan for more than one week. 
Rumsfeld would not confirm that special operations forces were in Afghanistan. "
Any ground forces are in harm's way," he told reporters on the way to talk with B-2 bomber crews at the Missouri Air Force base. 
The Pentagon chief didn't provide details of U.S. support for the northern alliance rebels and other anti-Taliban groups. 
Gaining the support of anti-Taliban fighters across Afghanistan will help the U.S. meet its goal of rooting out Al Qaeda and toppling the Taliban, Rumsfeld said. 
"It is going to be a lot easier, in my view, to try to persuade a number of them to oppose the Taliban and oppose Al Qaeda and to help defeat them, than it is, in fact, to defeat" the terrorists, he said. 
At the Pentagon, Rear Adm. John Stufflebeem, deputy director of operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told a news conference he would not comment on any aspect of ground operations. 
"If or when they are on the ground, being there would make them the most vulnerable individuals engaged in this campaign," he said. 
Reviewing Thursday's bombing, Stufflebeem said more than 90 strike aircraft went after 18 planned targets, including an array of airfields, air defense facilities, ammunition depots and military training sites.
Three Air Force C-17 cargo planes dropped humanitarian rations inside Afghanistan, he said. 
U.S. warplanes eased their bombardment after dawn today, Islam's holy day.
In Pakistan, a Taliban official said his side had nothing to fear from U.S. commandos. 
"Fifteen or 20 troops will be able to do nothing," embassy spokesman Sohail Shaheen said.
"If they want to send in soldiers, they should send in 100,000.
Then it can be a fight between our soldiers and theirs." 
President Bush's national security adviser declined to discuss the special forces' activities in Afghanistan.
"I cannot talk about what special operations are doing," Condoleezza Rice said on CNN from China, where Bush is attending an Asia-Pacific economic meeting. 
On ABC's "Good Morning America," she said: "We have (been) and are paving the way for friendly forces." 
Signs that special forces were ready to go or might already be inside Afghanistan have been building all week.
The Navy's USS Kitty Hawk, an aircraft carrier in the Indian Ocean, was loaded with special forces last weekend. 
And an Air Force special operations AC-130 gunship on Monday began attacking in southern Afghanistan.
The high-firepower AC-130s typically give close air cover to forces already on the ground or going in for small-unit operations. 
Bush refused to confirm the presence of U.S. ground forces in Afghanistan but said, "We will use whatever means are necessary to achieve our objective." 
Vice President Dick Cheney said Thursday night that airstrikes since Oct. 7 against terrorist camps and military targets have made possible a new phase of the war. 
"The success of our air campaign has cleared the way for further action which the Taliban and terrorists can neither predict nor escape," he said in a speech in New York. 
Special operations troops specialize in undercover search-and-destroy missions, quick commando raids, psychological warfare and training of friendly local forces. 
Rumsfeld said Thursday airstrikes alone will not be enough to rid Afghanistan of the Al Qaeda terrorist network. 
Rumsfeld said "you cannot really do sufficient damage" with air power alone.
Warplanes "can't crawl around on the ground and find people." 
Rice said there was evidence that "we are beginning to really degrade the military capability of the Taliban." 
"The president is determined that when this war is done that Afghanistan will not be territory from which one can launch and train and house and abet terrorists."
By Associated Press NEW YORK --
Barnes Noble.com named Marie J. Toulantis, who had been president and chief operating officer since May 2001, as chief executive of the online book seller. 
Toulantis fills a void that had been temporarily filled by Steve Riggio, vice chairman and the brother of chairman Leonard Riggio, for two years.
The last permanent chief executive was Jonathan Bulkeley, who resigned from the company in January 2000. 
Barnes Noble.com said that Toulantis played a central role in the company's success.
She oversaw the company's initial public offering in May 1999, the largest Internet offering at the time, and has since been involved in every aspect of the company's online business. 
Toulantis first joined Barnes Noble Inc. in 1997 as executive vice president of finance and later became chief financial officer.
Prior to joining Barnes Noble, Toulantis was a senior vice president at Chase Manhattan Bank. 
Reached by phone on Monday, Toulantis said that the online seller should reach profitablity this year.
She added that Barnes Noble.com will continue to drive down costs, and is focusing less on growth. 
"We want the right top line," she said.
"We are really looking at it as a more traditional business." 
Last Thursday, Barnes Noble.com reported that it narrowed its loss to $127.8 million, or 81 cents per share in the fourth quarter compares to a loss of $158.45 million, or $1 per share, in the year-ago period. 
Excluding certain items, Barnes Noble.com generated a loss of $31.5 million, or 20 cents per share.
Analysts polled by Thomson Financial/First Call had expected a loss of 21 cents before items. 
Revenues for the fourth quarter were $115 million, up from $114 million a year ago. 
Shares of Barnes Noble.com fell 26 cents, or 13.6 percent, to close at $1.65 in trading Monday on the Nasdaq Stock Market.
Coalition: Unhesitating support for anti-terror campaign wins Musharraf friends among Western leaders but enemies at home.
In demonstrations that have swept Pakistan following U.S.-led military assaults in Afghanistan, a new character has joined the usual suspects being burned in effigy at the hands of angry protesters.
Pakistan's president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, suddenly found himself in the company of President Bush and British Prime Minister Tony Blair as a target of slogan-chanting religious extremists who oppose the military attacks on Taliban strongholds in neighboring Afghanistan.
For Musharraf personally and for Pakistan as a whole, the events of recent days mark a turning point with political consequences--for his government and that of the United States.
Musharraf's unhesitating decision to join the international anti-terror campaign won him major points in Washington and in European capitals.
In fact, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell is scheduled to visit Islamabad, the capital, on Monday to reinforce, in word and deed, U.S. gratitude to a man who came to power in a coup . 
But critics contend that the Musharraf contract with the coalition came at a Faustian price.
The move required a virtual U-turn in Pakistan's Afghanistan policy, which previously favored the Taliban government as a "stabilizing" force in the region.
It also marked a reversal of the trend toward Islamizing key institutions--including Musharraf's own army--that began during the rule of the late President Gen. Zia ul-Haq in the early 1980s.
Musharraf's decision to back the United States comes, of course, with a price tag for Washington.
But even if he gets what he wants from the U.S., it is still uncertain whether the concessions will guarantee his political survival.
At a news conference earlier this week, Musharraf made it very clear what he wants from the Americans in exchange for his support.
The allied military operations, he said, should be "short and targeted."
Massive aid should be given in the form of humanitarian relief, water management and infrastructure rebuilding to "rehabilitate" postwar, and post-Taliban, Afghanistan.
Whatever government emerges from the ruins of Taliban Afghanistan must be representative of the ethnic Pushtun population that inhabits both sides of Pakistan's 1,500-mile western border.
Of particular concern to Musharraf is that the main opposition force in Afghanistan--the Northern Alliance, which is mostly ethnic Tajik and ethnic Uzbek--"should not be allowed to take advantage" of the U.S. military actions.
"There will be a void in the area controlled by the Taliban," Musharraf said.
"If this void is filled by the Northern Alliance, I think we will see a return to anarchy."
Finally, Musharraf said he wanted a more consistent relationship with the United States.
For many Pakistanis, the U.S. is like a fickle lover who is only attentive when something is wanted.
The previous high points in U.S.-Pakistani relations came in the early 1970s, when the Nixon administration needed help normalizing relations with China, and during the 1979-89 Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, when Pakistan served as the main staging ground and weapons conduit for the CIA-supported moujahedeen rebels.
After the Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan, there was a general feeling here, as one U.S. diplomat put it, that America had "cut and run."
Only a few years after the Soviets left, for example, America closed the large U.S. Agency for International Development mission here.
Then Pakistan was hit with successive economic sanctions for its nuclear weapons program and for the 1999 coup that put Musharraf in power.
By the time former President Clinton visited here last year, the relationship was so chilly that Clinton refused to publicly shake hands with Musharraf.
In the post-Sept. 11 era, all that has changed.
Overnight, the pariah became one of America's most important partners, leader of a front-line state in the war against terrorism.
But the 58-year-old Musharraf didn't forget the snub.
In the Monday news conference, in which he distinguished himself by answering all questions from all comers with a straightforward clarity not common among South Asian leaders, Musharraf recalled the decade of lost love between the two countries.
"Pakistan was, frankly, left high and dry," he said.
"Pakistanis felt a sense of abandonment.
I have been assured that this situation will not be like the last time."
In addition to the concessions as to a future Afghan government that Musharraf expects for his support of the coalition, the Pakistani leader will also want massive economic aid for his country to help cover Pakistan's losses during the Afghanistan campaign and U.S. help in Pakistan's dispute with India over the Kashmir region.
Of all the items on the Musharraf wish list, this last may be the one the Bush administration finds most difficult to grant, although the perceived U.S. "tilt" toward India, most analysts agree, probably ended with the Sept. 11 attacks.
On the economic front, the administration and Congress have already come up with an impressive package of aid that may include forgiveness of Pakistan's nearly $3-billion debt to the U.S.
On the battlefront, U.S. Defense Department officials apparently have contended that they have specifically avoided bomb and missile attacks in areas that would speed the advance of the Northern Alliance.
Northern Alliance commanders bitterly confirm this.
U.S. efforts to influence a post-Taliban government have concentrated on a return of former Afghan monarch Mohammad Zaher Shah, at least as the convening agent for a new ruling council, or loya jirga.
In meetings with the Pakistani media, U.S. Ambassador Wendy Chamberlin has stressed that the post-Taliban government be "broad-based" and "multiethnic"--exactly the words that Musharraf uses to describe the need for Pushtun participation.
In the days before the airstrikes began, Musharraf reshuffled key senior officers in the army, removing those with Taliban sympathies and replacing them with men who share his secular views.
Probably the most critical change was the removal of the army chief of intelligence, Lt. Gen. Mahmood Ahmed.
Ahmed led two delegations to the Taliban stronghold of Kandahar in southern Afghanistan in a failed attempt to avoid war by negotiating the release of Osama bin Laden, suspected of masterminding the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
But reports in the Pakistani media suggest that some army brass feel that Musharraf was too quick and too accommodating in his agreement to join the U.S.-led coalition.
A major fire broke out in the army general headquarters early Tuesday.
The army reported that the fire, which destroyed the headquarters training and accounting offices, was accidental, but it only added to speculation of unrest in the ranks.
So did the removal Tuesday of the commander of the Rawalpindi Corps, the unit that would respond to any attempted coup, added even more fuel to the speculation.
If there is significant dissatisfaction in the military, it most likely centers on the consequences if Musharraf's vision of a post-Taliban Afghanistan backfires.
"The thinking of the army has always been to have just one front that is India, not two fronts," said prominent Islamabad lawyer Hafeez Pirzada.
"Military commanders would feel really uncomfortable having a hostile India on one side and an unfriendly Afghanistan on the other."
On the domestic front, Musharraf contends that the demonstrations that have erupted following the U.S.-led attacks on Afghanistan represent only a small minority of Pakistan's 140 million people.
"These are some extremists who are going to have some agitations," Musharraf said.
But in a country as poor and volatile as Pakistan, said lawyer Pirzada, "even if this extremist element represents only 10%, it is still formidable."
Priceline.com reported fourth-quarter results Monday that beat expectations slightly, but its outlook for this year sent its stock down sharply. 
The Norwalk-based name-your-own-price Internet company reported a net loss of $1.3 million, or one cent per share, for the October-December period.
That was much narrower than a loss of $105 million, or 62 cents per year, for the fourth quarter a year earlier when the company had substantial downsizing costs. 
Excluding one-time gains and losses, Priceline.com reported a pro-forma profit of $3.3 million, or 1 cent per share.
Analysts surveyed by Thomson Financial/First Call expected a break-even quarter before one-time items. 
"The company did better than we expected -- modestly," said Jake Fuller, a research analyst with Thomas Weisel Partners in New York. 
But the market was expecting a better outlook this year because online travel has grown substantially, Fuller said.
While some Internet travel companies expect fast growth, Priceline confirmed expectations for this year of pro forma profits of 12 cents per share. 
Shares of Priceline.com closed down $1.49, or 23.5 percent, at $4.83 Monday on the Nasdaq Stock market. 
For the first quarter this year, Priceline.com said it expects its pro forma results will range from break-even to a profit of 2 cents per share and revenue between $260 million and $290 million.
Analysts had expected revenue of $299 million and profits of 2 cents per share. 
"The disappointment is you don't have dramatic growth prospects here as for other travel companies," Fuller said.
"They're not keeping pace with the rest of the Internet travel retailers." 
Priceline.com allows customers to name their own prices for airline tickets, hotel rooms, car rentals and home mortgages. 
Revenue for the fourth quarter was $235.3 million, up 3 percent from $228.1 million for the same period a year ago. 
Demand for airline tickets is good, but completing deals from customer offers has grown tougher, said Jeffrey Boyd, the company's president and chief operating officer said.
Customers are seeking deals below already deeply discounted airline prices, he said. 
"The airline business is in a tough environment, but under the circumstances it performed reasonably well," Boyd said. 
Priceline.com reported selling nearly 790,000 hotel room nights during the quarter, up 115 percent from the same period a year earlier.
Rental cars days increased 38 percent, while sales of airline tickets were up 4 percent, the company said. 
For the year, Priceline.com reported a net loss of $15.8 million, or 8 cents per share, on revenue of $1.17 billion.
That compared with a net loss of $329.5 million, or $1.97 per share, on revenue of $1.23 billion for 2000.
Owning a digital camera means never having to buy another roll of film.
But if you plan to pass around those digital pictures, you'll probably have to stock up on unusually expensive paper and ink.
Tech Times recently tested four small printers dedicated to digital photos, all of which work without the aid of a computer.
The printers read images either directly from the camera or from the camera's removable storage card.
Three of the models--the Canon CP-10, the Sony DPP-SV55 and the Olympus Camedia P-200--use dye sublimation, the same technique found in professional-grade printers.
The other--the Hewlett-Packard Photosmart 100--is a more conventional ink-jet printer.
The models vary dramatically in price, print size, editing functions and costs per print.
Yet they all were a breeze to use, and each produced prints comparable in quality to the local one-hour photo lab.
All provided near-instant gratification, churning out prints in 1 1/2 to 2 1/2 minutes.
Beyond the immediacy of the results, though, none of the printers offered a compelling reason to use it instead of an all-purpose computer printer or an online photo-processing service.
Each photo cost as much as $1.20, with no discounts for double prints.
's
Photosmart 100 was the most affordable, with prints costing around 40 cents each.
Still, the only real advantage the HP seems to provide over computer printers with photo-printing software is that it can be placed anywhere in the house, rather than being tethered to the PC.
Dye-sublimation printing is a bit like ironing a design onto a T-shirt.
The printer uses an array of tiny heaters to press dots of color onto the photo paper.
The process starts with a roll of thin plastic film that's embedded with cyan, magenta and yellow dye.
Before each image is printed, a new section of film lines up between the heating elements and the surface of the photo paper.
The amount of heat emitted by each tiny element determines how much dye gets vaporized and deposited onto the print.
The paper slides back and forth within the printer four times--once for each pigment, and once for a final coat of transparent sealer that blocks ultraviolet rays.
The result is a smooth, well-defined image.
And thanks to the UV-resistant coating, the prints should resist fading for 25 years or more--the same as those printed by a professional lab, said Chuck Westfall, an assistant director for technical information at Canon USA Inc.
Ink-jet printers, by contrast, are more like pointillist painters.
They spray droplets of liquid ink onto the photo paper one thin line at a time.
The HP Photosmart 100 starts with a container of cyan, magenta and yellow ink.
As paper passes through the printer, the ink cartridge slides back and forth, releasing a line of tiny drops of color.
On photo paper designed for ink-jet printers, the ink will seep below the glossy surface to resist smudging and prolong life.
Still, HP says the Photosmart's prints may start to fade after four to 51/2 years.
Other disadvantages of ink-jet printers generally are that they're slower than dye-sublimation models and their images tend to have softer edges.
On the other hand, the array of thousands of heating elements in dye-sublimation printers boosts their cost significantly over ink-jet models.
And the dye-infused ribbons are much more expensive than ink cartridges, so the prints are more costly as well.
The $300 CP-10 works only with four Canon digital cameras (the A10, A20, S110 and S300), and its largest prints are the size of a business card (2.1 by 3.4 inches).
Those limitations make the CP-10 the wrong printer for most consumers.
The size of a boxy camera, the CP-10 sets up quickly and easily.
A special wire connects the printer to a Canon camera's USB port, and all the operations are controlled from the camera's menu and LCD screen.
It takes seconds to select and crop images and even less time to send a newly snapped photo straight to the printer.
Each print takes less than a minute to process, rivaling a Polaroid's speed from shutter to paper.
And with the sticker option, users can print eight postage-stamp-size versions of an image on an adhesive-backed sheet.
The prints themselves were the brightest of the models tested and had the highest contrast.
But they also had the least vivid hues, resulting in paler skin tones and darker reds and blues.
The model is rated at 300 dots per inch, with 256 shades per color.
Canon sells its proprietary ink ribbons with packages of paper, with each ribbon capable of printing only the sheets provided in the pack.
The most economical option is 36 sheets for $17.50, which amounts to a little less than 50 cents per print.
For larger images and wider compatibility, Canon offers the $500 Canon CD-300, which can print 4-by-6-inch and 4-by-10-inch images from any camera.
Olympus' entry-level dye-sublimation printer, the P-200, lists for $599 but can be found online for $350 to $400.
It handles only one size of paper--4 by 3 inches--which can be used for one to 16 images.
The size of a compact dictionary, the P-200 can print images directly from a SmartMedia or CompactFlash card, or with an optional USB or parallel cable, from a computer.
With the optional rechargeable battery (list price: $100), you can take the P-200 with you to make prints on the road.
The printer can read the Digital Print Order Format (DPOF), which most digital cameras use to tag images on a storage card for printing.
Otherwise, controls on the printer let users select an image or sequence of images to print.
Users must select images by number because the P-200's small monochrome display can't show the images themselves.
The printer doesn't offer any mode for cropping images.
The only way it can alter picture quality is through a sharpness button, which subtly increases or decreases the crispness of the image.
The images tended to be lighter than the Canon's but darker than those of the other units tested, with deeper blues.
The printer was relatively fast, churning out photos in about 90 seconds.
The model is rated at 320 dots per inch, with 128 shades per color.
Olympus sells packs with 25 sheets of photo paper and a dye ribbon for a little under $30, which translates to $1.20 per print.
The largest and most feature-packed of the printers tested, the $350 DPP-SV55 can edit as well as print photos.
Like all Sony digital products, it's designed to work most easily with Memory Stick storage cards--the version of flash memory Sony developed.
But it also has a slot for PC cards, so it can accept other forms of flash memory with a PC card adapter.
The size of a three-ring binder, the DPP-SV55 is a bit daunting to use with a computer but extremely easy with a TV set.
The TV serves as a monitor, displaying menus and images to help users choose which photos to print and what effects to apply.
The Sony also supports DPOF, eliminating the need for a TV to do basic printing jobs.
The DPP-SV55's paper tray can handle two different sizes: 4 by 6 inches and 3 1/2 by 4 inches.
The larger sheets take about 90 seconds to print, the smaller ones a little less.
Each sheet can be split into four, nine or 16 images.
The built-in editing tools include cropping and enlarging; adjusting the brightness, color and sharpness; and adding a few simple filters.
The unit also offers a handful of templates for personalized postcards, calendars or stickers, and the cards can be further customized with text.
The editing tools came in handy because Sony's prints were the most deeply saturated in color.
Skin tones were ruddier and hues were more intense than any other units', and contrast tended to be lower.
The model is rated at 403 dots per inch, with 256 shades per color.
Sony sells packages of 25 4-by-6-inch sheets with a dye ribbon for $20, or 80 cents per sheet.
It also sells 30 sheets of the smaller paper with a dye ribbon for $15, or 50 cents per sheet.
Bearing an uncanny resemblance to a countertop radio, the $179 Photosmart 100 prints 4-by-6-inch, wallet-size (2 1/2-by-3 1/4-inch) or thumbnail images on glossy photo sheets, index cards or even plain paper.
The unit was the most widely compatible of the models testing, with slots for CompactFlash, SmartMedia and MemoryStick cards as well as a USB port for connecting to a computer.
Like the Olympus P-200, the Photosmart has a small screen that displays only numbers and icons.
It can't display which images are on the inserted storage cards, so users have to select images for printing by number.
The unit also lets people use the screens on their cameras to pick which images they want to print.
The Photosmart is low on features, with no ability to crop or adjust images.
It's also significantly slower than the other units tested, taking about 2 minutes and 50 seconds per photo.
The prints were brighter, crisper and less green than the other models' photos.
Although the results seemed washed out at times, the Photosmart did a better job than the other units in keeping white objects white.
It's rated at up to 2,400 by 1,200 dots per inch, but the difference in printing techniques makes it misleading to compare an ink jet's rating to a dye-sublimation model's.
The Photosmart uses a specific ink cartridge made only by HP, which costs $35 for up to 391 photos, depending on the color density.
But the unit can handle most manufacturers' 4-by-6-inch photo paper.
If you stick with HP premium paper, the cost per print is about 42 cents.
Jon Healey covers the convergence of entertainment and technology.
He can be reached at jon.healey@latimes.com.
Bottom line: Best suited for commercial applications that demand speedy, professional-quality prints.
If you want other stories on this topic, search the Archives at latimes.com/archives .
For information about reprinting this article, go to www.lats.com/rights .
Standoff:
The regime will not comply without evidence of his guilt, says the ambassador to Pakistan.
The White House repeats that it will not negotiate.
Afghanistan's ruling Taliban rejected President Bush's ultimatum Friday, vowing to continue to protect Osama bin Laden and his terrorist followers even if that provokes a war and the destruction of the regime.
Word of the Taliban's refusal to comply with Bush's blunt demands came from the regime's ambassador to Pakistan, who said there is no evidence linking Bin Laden and his Al Qaeda organization to the suicide hijackings that destroyed the World Trade Center, damaged the Pentagon and killed more than 6,000 people.
"If there is no evidence and proof, we're not prepared to give up Osama bin Laden," Abdul Salam Zaeef told a press conference in Islamabad, Pakistan's capital.
The United Arab Emirates today cut diplomatic relations with Afghanistan's ruling Taliban movement, the official UAE news agency WAM reported.
The news agency said the nation decided on the move after trying to persuade the Taliban government to hand over Bin Laden.
The UAE's action leaves only two nations--Saudia Arabia and Pakistan--that recognize the Taliban as the government of Afghanistan, and those ties are strained.
Bin Laden is an exiled Saudi, and ties with Pakistan are at the breaking point because Pakistani President Gen. Pervez Musharraf decided to support the United States against the Taliban, which controls about 95% of Afghan territory.
On Friday, White House Press Secretary Ari Fleischer brushed aside the Taliban's rejection.
"The president's message to the Taliban today is the same message that he gave last night, that there will be no negotiations and no discussions.
He expects the Taliban to honor the demands that he made in his speech last night, to cease their efforts to support and harbor terrorists and to turn terrorists over to the United States or other authorities."
Asked if Bush rejected the Taliban's response, Fleischer replied: "That's a fair characterization."
The Taliban's information ministry said today its forces had shot down a helicopter belonging to the opposition Northern Alliance--not a pilotless U.S. plane as originally reported.
In an interview, the Afghan consul-general in Peshawar, Najibullah, said he had spoken to Afghans who saw a craft shot down.
He said the aircraft was downed by a Soviet-made surface-to-air missile.
The Taliban are known to have more than 200 Soviet-era SAMs, in addition to more than 100 U.S.-made Stinger missiles.
The refusal to surrender Bin Laden came in the face of a blunt warning from the president in his speech Thursday: "The Taliban must act and act immediately.
They will hand over the terrorists or they will share in their fate."
Bush did not detail the evidence against Bin Laden, asserting that "Al Qaeda is to terror what the Mafia is to crime."
But U.S. officials have said the evidence is overwhelming that Bin Laden was the mastermind behind the worst act of terrorism on U.S. soil.
Zaeef also said Taliban authorities have rejected a compromise suggested by a council of 1,000 Islamic clerics that Bin Laden be encouraged to leave Afghanistan voluntarily.
He said the proposal was not binding on the regime and will be ignored.
Nevertheless, the Frontier Post, a newspaper based in Peshawar, Pakistan, reported Friday that Bin Laden had traveled to Wakhan, an Afghan town near the border with China.
The newspaper's account--which could not be confirmed independently--said Bin Laden's movements were in response to the clerical council.
Meanwhile, Bush and Secretary of State Colin L. Powell continued to recruit foreign governments for an ideologically diverse global coalition in which abhorrence of terrorism is the only requirement for membership.
On Friday, China signed up despite years of political friction resulting from Washington's criticism of China's human rights record.
Powell said the administration expects China to supply intelligence on Bin Laden's activities and to help Washington locate and freeze his fiscal assets.
Powell said it is unlikely that China will be asked to participate in military action against the Taliban.
Bush made no public comments during the day.
He spoke by telephone with the leaders of three countries with large Muslim populations--Turkey, Oman and Nigeria--to thank them for expressions of support and condolence.
He also scheduled visits next week with the leaders of Canada and Japan, all part of his effort to develop as broad a coalition as possible.
The president spent about 20 minutes Friday with Chinese Foreign Minister Tang Jiaxuan, who had spent more than two hours with Powell earlier in the day.
White House spokesman Sean McCormick said Bush's trip to China next month remains on schedule.
"Both sides have already started our cooperation on the anti-terrorism field, and such cooperation will continue into the future," Tang said as he left the State Department.
"We firmly oppose and strongly condemn all forms of terrorism in all their evil acts."
At the end of the day, Bush left for Camp David, giving a thumbs-up salute from the door of the Marine One helicopter to several hundred White House staffers who had turned out on the White House driveway in a flag-waving show of support.
In his Thursday night speech, Bush seemed to broaden the administration's objectives, saying that after U.S. forces finished with Al Qaeda, they would take on "every terrorist group of global reach."
But on Friday, a senior administration official said that Bush's formula covers only truly global organizations--a qualification that apparently leaves out local terrorist groups such as the Irish Republican Army and perhaps even anti-Israel organizations such as Hamas and Hezbollah.
"It's Al Qaeda plus those who harbor them, first," the official said.
"I don't think there was ever, frankly, much disagreement that we were going to have to do something very focused."
The official said the debate within the administration determined that local terror groups are deplorable but that "global terrorism . . .
was the threat."
Meanwhile, the State Department began clearing away some of the diplomatic undergrowth inhibiting participation in the coalition by Pakistan, perhaps the most important country in the world when it comes to dealing with the Taliban.
On Thursday and Friday, department officials informed members of Congress that the administration was moving to ease sanctions against Pakistan and India that were imposed after the South Asian rivals exploded nuclear devices.
A State Department official said the sanctions probably will be softened sometime next week.
In 1998, the Clinton administration blocked U.S. economic and military assistance to Pakistan and India, along with military and high-technology sales and U.S. support for World Bank loans.
In 1999, additional sanctions were applied to Pakistan after Musharraf led a military coup that ousted an elected government.
Musharraf remains president.
Musharraf has already pledged full support for U.S. anti-terrorism efforts, but removal of some sanctions will help him explain his stand to a restive public.
In London, Foreign Secretary Jack Straw announced that he will fly to Iran next week to attempt to enlist the Tehran regime in the anti-terrorism alliance.
It will be the first visit to Iran by a British foreign secretary since the Islamic Revolution there in 1979.
Iranian President Mohammad Khatami has condemned the attacks with hijacked airliners, but Iran's support for retaliation is uncertain and Britain has been working to bring it on board.
Prime Minister Tony Blair spoke with Khatami on Thursday and Straw spoke with Iranian Foreign Minister Kamal Kharrazi on Sunday.
"The president and the government of Iran have been powerful in their opposition to the Taliban," Straw said.
In Moscow, Russian President Vladimir V. Putin gave the strongest signal yet that Russia will play a part in the war on terrorism.
"We are ready to cooperate with the U.S. in fighting terrorism in the widest possible sense," Putin said in an interview with the German ARD network from his vacation home in the southern Russian city of Sochi.
"We have not received any specific requests as of yet, but the special services have been cooperating for a long time already.
The question is how to bring this cooperation to a qualitatively new level.
We are ready to do that."
In Washington, Powell urged the Organization of American States to activate a two-year-old Western Hemisphere Committee Against Terrorism.
"We have this tool," Powell told a special meeting of OAS foreign ministers.
"We need it.
We must use it."
The organization has already invoked the Rio pact, a Cold War-era treaty that asserts that an attack on one hemispheric country is an attack on all.
On Friday, the foreign ministers approved two resolutions, one highlighting the "terrorist threat to the Americas" and
the other intended to strengthen cooperation "to prevent, combat and eliminate terrorism.
"
"Twenty-nine out of the 34 nations represented here today have citizens who were lost in the World Trade Center bombing last week," Powell said.
"Truly this attack against one of us was an attack against all of us."
Kempster reported from Washington and Marshall reported from Islamabad.
Times staff writers James Gerstenzang and Jim Mann in Washington, Marjorie Miller in London and Maura Reynolds in Moscow contributed to this report. 
By Associated Press SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic -- The Associated Press erroneously reported Feb. 21 that Mike Tyson plans to train in the Dominican Republic for a match with Lennox Lewis.
Sterling McPherson, speaking in English to Dominican reporters, said he was holding a news conference "to explore the possibility" of such a training session.
A simultaneous translation into Spanish misstated his plans; the AP's story was based on the Spanish translation.
Tyson adviser Shelly Finkel said the boxer had no intention of training in the Carribean nation.
The AP also erroneously identified McPherson as a member of Tyson's management team.
McPherson heads his own company, Sterling Promotions, and is not associated with Tyson.
Inkjet printers that cost no more than their ink cartridges are popping up on store shelves everywhere.
Although cheap printers may seem like a bargain, don't expect too much.
You get what you pay for.
We tested five inkjet printers selling for less than $100--the Epson 480SXU, Epson 777, Lexmark Z23, Canon S400 and Hewlett-Packard 468C--and only one exceeded our modest expectations.
All we wanted was a fast printer that produced relatively high-quality images.
The $79 Epson 777 actually did.
The $99 Canon S400 came close.
The others, however, produced high-quality images slowly and low-quality images quickly--if they produced images at all.
Cheap printers are perfect for computer users who want a workhorse machine to output rough copies of Web pages or family pictures.
They probably won't appeal to people who print lots of text pages--who are better off with a laser printer--or to photo enthusiasts--who rely on higher-end printers.
In any case, it's worth keeping in mind that refilling the ink cartridges can sometimes cost more than the printers themselves.
Most of the models output draft-quality black-and-white text pages in only a few seconds.
They slowed considerably when producing at a higher quality, printing at a rate of 25 to 65 seconds a page.
Most produced clean text, but some were not worth the wait for large documents.
The Lexmark Z23, for example, took more than 25 minutes to print a 23-page term paper.
Color printing time was also lengthy.
The Epson 777 took six minutes to produce a high-quality photograph.
The rest took nine to 18 minutes.
Even then, some of the images were slightly pixilated.
With each model, we printed a 23-page college term paper and a high-resolution color photograph, testing both high-quality and high-speed settings.
The printers were also evaluated on their ease of use and setup.
Overall, the Epson 777 consistently produced the cleanest--and fastest--prints.
At its fastest speeds, it output black-and-white text at about 13 seconds a page and the color photograph in three minutes.
Lexmark, which does not include a black-ink cartridge, produced the worst text pages.
Although the color cartridge blended the ink to create black, some of the colors printed through.
The HP printer was as fast as the Epson 777 when producing black-and-white prints, but it would not print color photographs.
An "unknown system error" occurred that could not be resolved even after the printer's software was uninstalled and reloaded.
The least expensive model tested at $39 (or $19 with a mail-in rebate), the Epson 480SXU printed draft text documents at just 10 seconds a page.
The text was so light, though, it was barely legible.
In high-quality text mode, which took more than three times longer to print, type was as clean as that produced by the more expensive Epson 777 model.
It was, however, the slowest to print photographs.
At its highest-quality setting, it produced an image in 18 minutes.
At its fastest setting, it produced one in nine minutes.
Although usually sold as a bundle printer, the Epson 480SXU is sometimes available separately.
Its features are limited.
The machine, for example, does not have an on-off switch.
Power is controlled by the electrical cord plugged into an outlet.
It also does not have a parallel port, using only a USB cable.
Printing text documents at about 26 seconds a page, the $79 Epson 777 produced the fastest high-quality pages.
The machine's photo printing capabilities were the most impressive of the five printers.
At its fastest speed it output an image in only three minutes.
They looked good from a distance, but the photographs were slightly pixilated.
Its documents were the cleanest of the five printers, however, and even those produced at its fastest speed were often better than the highest-quality prints from some of the other models.
Selling for about $79 (or $49 with a mail-in rebate), the Lexmark Z23 does not include a black-ink cartridge, which costs an additional $28.99.
It prints black-and-white documents without the extra cartridge, but the text is lightly streaked red, yellow and green.
Because the printer must mix colors to obtain the black ink, its text output times were the longest of all the printers.
At its fastest speed, it output a page of text in about 30 seconds.
At its slowest, it took more than a minute.
It produced a high-quality color image in about nine minutes.
Because Lexmark's software activates an audio announcement when a printing job begins and ends, you don't have to sit next to the machine and wait for it to finish.
Just listen for the "printing complete" announcement.
One of only two printers tested that did not cut off the page numbers at the bottom of documents, the $99 Canon S400 was the most consistent after the Epson 777.
At its fastest speed, it printed black-and-white documents in just under 20 seconds.
At its highest-quality setting, its outputs were just as good as the Epson 777.
But the machine took nearly twice as long to produce full-color images, and it could not produce high-quality "super photos" without an additional photo ink cartridge.
Unlike the other printers that had one black and one color cartridge, the $99 Canon has four separate cartridges: black, cyan, magenta and yellow.
Each of the color cartridges costs $11.95.
Although the $99 ($69 with rebate)
Hewlett-Packard 468C had the potential to rival the Epson 777, it did not print full-color photographs in our test because of an "unknown system error.
" The warning attributed it to an "error writing to the USB" and suggested restarting the computer.
Done.
But it still did not print the photograph.
Checking the cable connection and running a test page, which printed in color without problem, yielded nothing.
After trying to print the photograph a third time without success, we unplugged the USB port and tried using a parallel port.
That didn't work.
The problem persisted after uninstalling and reloading the software.
Although it did not produce any photographs, it printed black-and-white documents in only 10 seconds at its fastest speed and about 26 seconds at its highest quality.
The text images weren't as clean as they could have been, however.
Times staff writer Christine Frey covers personal technology.
If you want other stories on this topic, search the Archives at latimes.com/archives .
For information about reprinting this article, go to www.lats.com/rights .
Threat:
Sending spores through the mail is a dangerous new pattern, experts say.
Changes in post office procedures and technology are urged.
Though it is difficult to turn anthrax into a weapon of mass destruction, it is quite easy to grow the bacteria in a lab and distribute small quantities piecemeal, even through the mail, experts said Saturday.
"Growing this organism is no problem," said Norman Cheville, dean of Iowa State University's School of Veterinary Medicine.
"It grows readily.
It grows overnight."
Until last week, the threat of anthrax had been couched largely in terms of its use as a weapon of mass destruction--and how difficult that would be.
But the death of a man in Florida and the infection of an NBC News employee in New York have shed light on the ease of using anthrax for individual criminal acts.
New York officials confirmed Saturday that an envelope opened by an NBC staff member tested positive for anthrax.
A letter sent to a Microsoft office in Reno also tested positive, Nevada officials said.
Bioterrorism experts said the use of the U.S. Postal Service to transmit lethal bacteria is significant and should trigger changes in how mail is handled.
"After hundreds of threats and hoaxes in the last few years, somebody has finally been able to do it," said David Siegrist, director of Studies for Countering Biological Terrorism at the Potomac Institute for Policy Studies in Virginia.
"That has to guide our judgment going forward on how we treat some of these threats."
In the short term, Siegrist said, company mail-room employees should use rubber gloves and be vigilant for suspicious packages with no return addresses, block lettering and excessive tape.
Going forward, though, he said, the post office must develop and use new technologies that protect against the spread of biological agents.
Postal officials said there is no way to personally inspect the hundreds of millions of letters and packages delivered every day.
They have urged the public to be cautious and to report suspicious activity.
A few milligrams of anthrax, which would not be visible to the naked eye, contain millions of spores, enough to infect thousands of people if dispersed properly, experts said.
More than likely, most people would only be able to produce a small fraction of that.
"This is what you can do with any germ," said Philip Hanna, a University of Michigan professor of microbiology and immunology.
"Anthrax is just new to the United States' perspective.
What's scarier is the intent, not the technologies.
"Fertilizer isn't particularly scary, but if you put it into a van with gasoline and drive it to a federal building, you can blow it up," Hanna said.
That's what happened in 1995 at the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City.
Fortunately, Hanna said, the human body is somewhat resilient to anthrax, and it takes thousands of spores to cause infection. "
Anthrax is a very inefficient sort of murder weapon," he said.
"If you send out thousands of anthrax letters, even if they're all opened, very few people are going to contract the disease.
For once with anthrax, nature cuts us a break."
In Florida, only one person died of inhalational anthrax; at least seven others tested positive for exposure but did not become ill.
Until the mid-1990s, the government kept little data on who shared and sold samples of anthrax and other dangerous bacteria.
In the mid-1980s, before the Persian Gulf War, the not-for-profit biological supply company American Type Culture Collection sold three strains of anthrax to Iraq, which reportedly used the bacteria to create biological weapons.
Then, in 1995, a laboratory worker at Ohio State University obtained three vials of bubonic plague from American Type by falsifying university letterhead.
The man, Larry Wayne Harris, pleaded guilty to one count of wire fraud.
Harris, a member of the white supremacist group Aryan Nations, claimed that he cultivated anthrax by taking samples from a 20-year-old burial site for cattle that had died of the disease.
After realizing that lab controls were lax, Congress passed a law in 1996 that severely limits the interstate shipment of anthrax and other pathogenic strains, such as plague.
Researchers wishing to obtain anthrax today must first receive a license from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
In addition, shippers must inform the government when they send an anthrax sample, and researchers must then acknowledge receipt.
Labs are not the only places to acquire anthrax, though.
The bacterium can be obtained from contaminated animals or from soil near where the animals are buried, experts said.
In addition, labs and some foreign governments have samples of anthrax.
Of the 472 cell culture collections registered with the World Federation of Culture Collections, 46 contain virulent strains of Bacillus anthracis.
Those strains can be purchased by scientists, and the rules vary depending on the country of origin.
Sophisticated technology is needed to turn rod-shaped anthrax bacteria into dried, particle-size spores that could contaminate thousands of people over a large geographic area.
Creating smaller supplies intended to affect one or two people doesn't require any equipment, said anthrax expert Martin Hugh-Jones of Louisiana State University.
Anthrax infection can take three forms, depending on how the spores enter the body.
If enough spores are breathed in, inhalational anthrax will develop and is nearly always fatal if not treated early.
Spores also can enter the body through a cut in the skin.
Finally, a person can develop an anthrax infection by eating food contaminated with the bacteria.
Antibiotics such as Cipro, doxycyclene and penicillin are effective in treating the infection if used early.
Inhalational anthrax is the most deadly, while cutaneous anthrax (through the skin) usually resolves itself on its own.
The man who died in Florida had inhalational anthrax, while an NBC employee in New York developed the infection through her skin.
"It's not a threat to national security and it's not even a threat to those individuals who receive it as long as they report it," said Randy Larsen, director of the Institute for Homeland Security in Virginia.
Military:
Rugged terrain gives the regime's forces an enormous advantage, specialists say.
But new U.S. tactics could turn the tables.
While American aircraft continue to pound fixed military positions in Afghanistan, its Taliban regime appears to be preparing for a protracted guerrilla conflict by retreating to mountain redoubts, private homes and mosques to await invading ground troops.
This hide-and-wait strategy, an age-old Afghan fighting method used by the moujahedeen who fought Soviet occupiers during the 1980s, has been openly described in recent statements by Taliban officials and confirmed in anecdotal accounts from independent local commanders, refugees and humanitarian aid agencies with offices in Afghan cities.
"I'd be very surprised if they give up without waging a full-scale guerrilla war," said Rifaat Hussain, chairman of the department of defense and strategic studies at Quaid-i-Azam University in Islamabad, Pakistan's capital.
"The worst is yet to come for the alliance forces."
Afghanistan has some of the world's most forbidding terrain--barren, rugged land that allows armed groups to attack and quickly disappear into hidden recesses, gorges and caves.
The same conditions that make finding Osama bin Laden so daunting could give the Taliban forces an enormous advantage in any direct confrontation with U.S. forces on the ground.
These conditions leave many Afghanistan specialists puzzled by comments from President Bush about "encircling the terrorists" and a similar remark by Sen. Carl Levin (D-Mich.)
that referred to "tightening the noose."
The savvy to fight in such forbidding terrain seems to come with mother's milk for most Afghans, who are raised on tales of how their forefathers defeated a seemingly endless succession of powerful invaders.
The prospect of a guerrilla campaign looms after two weeks of U.S.-led airstrikes that have generated few signs of any weakening of the Taliban's resolve.
"Their military capability hasn't been destroyed, but more importantly, their spirit is intact," said Kamal Matinuddin, a retired Pakistani general who has written extensively on the Taliban.
"The hard line will take to the hills and do hit-and-run from the countryside."
Guerrilla tactics worked spectacularly for the CIA-supplied moujahedeen against the massive presence of Soviet troops in the 1980-89 war of resistance.
Under very different circumstances, such tactics were used by the Viet Cong to humble American troops in Vietnam.
But how effective they would be against American hit-and-run tactics employing elite Special Forces units remains to be seen.
The first announced limited U.S. ground action occurred Saturday, when more than 100 American troops were dropped into the airport at Kandahar, the Taliban stronghold in southern Afghanistan, for a seven-hour operation.
The still-evolving Taliban response to the American attacks has been to retreat and go underground.
Taliban officials have admitted that their government functions have been crippled by the air attacks, which have destroyed the country's telephone system and damaged military command centers.
To replace some of their hardware, they have taken to raiding international assistance groups.
Deputy Coordinator for the United Nations Antonio Donini told reporters in Islamabad on Saturday that privately financed mine-clearance groups affiliated with the U.N. have lost 80 vehicles to marauding Taliban fighters during the past two weeks and that several U.N. offices have been attacked and looted.
"The ability of the U.N. to continue to work in Afghanistan is rapidly deteriorating," he said.
Also Saturday, the international relief agency Mercy Corps, which operates medical clinics and drought relief programs in the Afghan provinces of Kandahar and Helmand, said Taliban fighters had seized some of its offices and commandeered two of its aid trucks seeking to blend into the civilian population.
At a U.N. news conference Saturday, other aid agencies said they have witness reports of Talibs settling into civilian residences in Kandahar and other locales after expelling their occupants.
"While their traditional command structure appears to be unraveling," said one Pakistan-based aid official, "Taliban is taking refuge in homes, mosques and other civilian quarters."
At a news conference in Islamabad on Friday, Taliban Ambassador Abdul Salam Zaeef said the Taliban was preparing "for a long war" by stockpiling and hiding munitions and retreating from identifiable military positions.
As a result of these moves, Zaeef said, Taliban military casualties have so far been minimal.
All the senior Taliban leadership, he said, is safe, as is the regime's notorious guest, Bin Laden.
"It is very interesting that we have had 14 days of bombing and Special Forces on the ground but haven't seen the Taliban retaliate in any way," Hussain said.
"They are lying low, preserving their energies and resources, waiting to wage a guerrilla war."
The language used by Taliban commanders remains defiant.
"We will retreat to the mountains and begin a long guerrilla war to reclaim our pure land from infidels and free our country again like we did against the Soviets," said Paktia province commander Jalaluddin Haqqani, a Taliban ally in the border area south of Kabul, the Afghan capital.
Haqqani's comments were published in a long interview with the News, a Pakistani newspaper.
Other commanders who operate independently or who are openly opposed to the Taliban claim that the American air attacks have been more effective than the Taliban will admit.
Some commanders from Nangarhar province, interviewed in Peshawar, Pakistan, on Thursday, said American air actions near Jalalabad, a key city in eastern Afghanistan, have successfully driven Taliban forces into the nearby hills.
"The only time you see them is when they come into town in their Datsun pickups with a machine gun mounted on the back," said one of the commanders, who claimed to have 120 fighters under his leadership.
"They do their shopping in the market, and then they disappear."
Although the air attacks appear to have solidified support for the Taliban in some areas, there have been several reports that some civilians, fearful that their villages and neighborhoods will be bombed, have asked the Taliban to leave.
"The Taliban has lost so much popular support," said Rostom Sherzad, who claims to have 120 fighters under his command in the Khugiani district near Jalalabad.
"When they come to a village, the people ask them to leave because they don't want to become a target."
Sherzad traveled clandestinely to Pakistan recently to meet with other local commanders loyal to a Jalalabad warlord, Haji Mohammed Zaman.
Coalition: Bush's offer to halt airstrikes in exchange for Bin Laden
offers a cover for allies and plays on rifts within the Taliban, officials say.
President Bush's offer to end military attacks on Afghanistan in exchange for Osama bin Laden and his Al Qaeda network was a calculated move to shore up coalition support and play on growing rifts within the ruling Taliban movement over the cost of harboring the Saudi fugitive, U.S. officials said Friday.
The "second chance" offer, made by Bush during a news conference Thursday, was designed as a catalyst--and incentive--to provoke challenges to Taliban leader Mullah Mohammed Omar, the officials said.
"If, by some stroke of magic, the Taliban delivered Bin Laden and closed the Al Qaeda camps, then the U.S. agenda would certainly change," said a senior State Department official, who requested anonymity.
"The president's message is that it's never too late to repent."
To spread the word, the Voice of America on Friday broadcast the president's offer, which could play on long-standing differences within the strict Islamic organization that has ruled most of Afghanistan for five years.
"The Taliban has always been a collection of groups rather than a homogenous . . .
movement," said a senior Bush administration official who also requested anonymity.
"There's been a lot of disagreement with Sheik Omar for a long time, particularly over Bin Laden.
So it would not be surprising at all to see some key people say that 'this is insane
, we're tied to something that is going to destroy our country.'
"
Some news reports emerged Friday from the region that Taliban Foreign Minister Wakil Ahmed Mutawakel was among those turning against the leadership and that he might consider an effort to make a deal with Washington.
But U.S. officials said they had no firsthand knowledge of such high-level dissent.
U.S. officials made clear Friday that they have no illusions about the prospects of Omar giving up Bin Laden, despite the U.S. air assaults on Afghanistan that began Sunday.
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld gave a flat "no" when asked if he thought it was possible.
"We'd be interested in encouraging factionalism within the Taliban," said the State Department official, "but we're not counting on that to get our man.
We're not holding our breath."
Still, U.S. officials also hope that Bush's proposal will serve as a useful public relations move that signals to allies, particularly among Arab and Muslim countries, that the administration would prefer to find a peaceful resolution to the standoff.
The most fragile element within the wide coalition battling terrorism includes Islamic states concerned about public sympathy toward Bin Laden's message--and about potential backlash as the U.S.-led military campaign continues.
Bush's gesture came on the eve of the first Muslim Sabbath since the bombing campaign began.
On Friday, the administration closely monitored public reaction for signs of escalating anti-U.S. demonstrations that might in turn force cracks in the coalition.
In Asia, Muslims in Indonesia and Sri Lanka burned U.S. flags at protests, while Malaysian police used water cannons to disperse about 3,000 demonstrators, some of whom waved "Go to Hell America" placards outside the U.S. Embassy.
In the Middle East, a group of Muslims in the Lebanese port city of Tripoli cheered Bin Laden and jeered the United States, while Turkish riot police fired tear gas to break up a crowd of about 2,000 Muslims who called for Turkey to condemn the U.S. airstrikes.
So far, these and similar demonstrations have been contained by each country's government.
Bush's offer to the Taliban may provide cover for some of the governments that want to support the U.S. but face vociferous opposition at home, said Henri Barkey, a former State Department official who dealt with terrorism issues and is now at Lehigh University.
Among those it could help is Pakistan's president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, who had promised a restive population that the U.S. would wage only a short conflict.
He now could say the duration of the U.S. military operation, which Bush said Thursday could last two years, is the fault of the Taliban, Barkey said.
Bush's offer also provides new incentive for cooperation to other nations suspected of helping the terrorist cause, Barkey said.
"Essentially, it sends a message that if you harbor terrorists and you cough them up, you'll get an amnesty," he said.
A prolonged shutdown of air travel and cargo systems could severely affect the economy.
Tighter security is expected to be imposed.
The skies above the nation emptied and all U.S. airports were closed for the first time in history, after the simultaneous hijackings of four commercial jetliners at the heart of Tuesday's terrorist attacks.
The Bush administration said it was continuing a virtual ban on air travel today until the safety of passengers could be ensured.
Transportation Secretary Norman Mineta told reporters he could give neither a time nor a date for full resumption of air service.
He said it was decided to indefinitely postpone full restoration of service after aviation officials discussed security problems with the FBI and intelligence agencies.
Mineta did say passengers stranded in flights amid Tuesday's terrorist attacks would be allowed to fly to their original destinations.
But the general grounding of flights continues, he emphasized. 
When flights resume, passengers won't be able to check their bags at the curb, they will be subjected to random checks, they will see more uniformed security and they should arrive even earlier.
Mineta said he is acting to augment airline security after Tuesday's terrorist attacks in New York City and Washington, which began with the hijacking of four commercial airliners.
"There will be higher levels of surveillance, more stringent searches," Mineta said.
"Travelers may experience some inconveniences, but we ask for your patience.
We must do whatever it takes with safety as our highest priority."
The FAA advises passengers to call their airlines before going to the airport, to make sure flights are taking off on time.
Many pilots did not finish their runs on Tuesday, choosing instead to land at the nearest airport after the FAA halted all plane traffic.
On Tuesday, an air travel system that normally moves 1.5 million people on more than 40,000 commercial and chartered U.S. flights was brought to a standstill, as the more than 5,000 jets that crisscross the country were grounded by the FAA as a precaution in case of other attacks.
Federal authorities also quickly diverted hundreds of international flights bound for the U.S. to airports elsewhere, mainly in Canada.
Airlines in Asia, Europe and other continents suspended service to the United States.
Los Angeles International Airport was closed and evacuated.
Amtrak rail service and Greyhound bus operations also were halted, mainly in the Northeast.
"The airline transportation system as we knew it died as of 9 a.m.
New York time," when the second hijacked jetliner plowed into the World Trade Center, said Michael Boyd, president of aviation consulting firm Boyd Group in Evergreen, Colo.
Air travelers' "ability to walk through a simple security system run by people who don't know security is gone," he said.
The astonishing shutdown of air travel provided one of the most tangible ways that Americans across the country felt a direct ripple effect of the attacks on the East Coast.
Not only could countless numbers of travelers not fly, but thousands of others also found themselves landing in cities other than their destinations, as the FAA ordered en route jets to land at the nearest airport.
Any prolonged shutdown of the air travel system and the resultant disruption of business and leisure travel and cargo flights could cause serious harm to the U.S. economy.
On Tuesday, aircraft flown by the U.S. Postal Service and cargo carriers such as United Parcel Service and FedEx--which move the nation's mail and billions of dollars in goods around the country daily--also were grounded by the FAA.
The airline industry and the airports--notably LAX--quickly became a focal point of the nightmarish tragedy, owing to the terrorists' use of four commercial jetliners to carry out the suicide missions.
All four were flying to California, and together they carried more than 260 people.
American Airlines, the nation's largest airline, confirmed that two of its flights were seized and used in the attacks.
Flight 11, a Boeing 767 flying from Boston to Los Angeles, was one of the jetliners that hit the World Trade Center towers in New York.
The other American Airlines plane that was hijacked was Flight 77, a Boeing 757 flying from Washington's Dulles Airport to Los Angeles.
That aircraft was the one that crashed into the Pentagon.
United Airlines also lost two jetliners.
Flight 175 from Boston's Logan Airport to Los Angeles, a 767, was the other jetliner that slammed into the World Trade Center.
United Flight 93, a 757 en route to San Francisco from Newark, N.J., crashed 80 miles southeast of Pittsburgh.
"We are horrified by these tragic events," said Donald Carty, chairman of American Airlines.
Stifling LAX's operations alone, even for a short while, could have a huge effect on Southern California.
It is the world's third-busiest airport in terms of passengers handled--more than 200,000 people a day, who come and go via 100,000 cars and scores of shuttles, vans and other vehicles--and its annual economic contribution to the region amounts to more than $60 billion.
"When the airports open, it is really going to be worse than any major storm because every airport has been closed," said Terry Trippler, president of consulting firm Trippler & Associates in Minneapolis.
"My gut feeling is that it will take until this weekend for everything to get back to normal as far as air travel is concerned," he said.
Others said there could be widespread fear among consumers about flying again soon, which could further cripple the airline industry.
The shutdown also could hurt the car rental agencies, which do most of their business at airports, although there were reports that many stranded passengers descended on the firms Tuesday as they scrambled for alternative transportation.
It's "already a tough year for the car rental industry, and this could be devastating," said Jon LeSage, research director at Abrams Travel Data Services in Long Beach.
Moreover, Mondays through Wednesdays are the biggest rental days because of heavy business travel, he said.
Mary Jersin, a spokeswoman for Hong Kong-based Cathay Pacific Airways, said that the carrier had eight U.S.-bound flights either diverted to Vancouver, Canada, or canceled and that it called off four more that were scheduled to leave Hong Kong after midnight early today.
Jetliners also lined up on the tarmacs of Canadian airports after U.S. airspace was closed, and passengers emerged stunned by events south of the border.
Lee Manchen of Detroit, a passenger heading home on a Northwest Airlines flight from Tokyo, said the pilot announced that mechanical problems had forced him to divert the plane to Vancouver.
The pilot later apologized, Manchen said, for not telling the truth, saying, "It was the worst day of our lives, and he would remember it forever."
American Airlines pilot Larry McCalley, 58, of Mission Viejo arrived at Orange County's John Wayne Airport expecting to work.
But he, like other pilots, was sent home.
McCalley said that until about 10 months ago, American's ill-fated Flight 11 was his flight.
"It just seems a shame that the world has to come to this--all the victims," McCalley said, visibly stunned.
"You think about it
but you look at the probability of something like this happening, but you don't really expect it."
John Wayne Airport officials closed that facility about 9 a.m., although few members of the public were there at the time.
No flights had taken off, and about 20 jets sat empty and silent at their gates or on the tarmac.
Yolanda Perez, a spokeswoman for the airport, said the facility's secured areas had been evacuated about 7 a.m.--
the time the first flights leave John Wayne--and cars were barred from parking curbside and security was increased.
The airport normally handles about 270 departures and arrivals daily involving about 6,000 passengers.
Xavier Jorquiera, 41, of Rancho Santa Margarita was aboard an American Airlines flight to Mexico City about 6 a.m. when the order came to evacuate the plane, which was still on the ground.
He wasn't told the reason until passengers were back in the terminal.
"It's horrible.
It's a tragedy," he said.
Boyd, the independent airline analyst, blamed the extent of the damage square on the FAA, charging that the agency has allowed security to be lax at passenger check-in points around major airports.
"The airport perimeters at many airports have been sieves, and the FAA has done nothing about it," he said.
FAA officials could not be immediately reached to respond.
Travel and airline experts said the tragic events could result in devastating short-term losses for the major U.S. carriers and may lead to higher ticket prices as the companies pass on to consumers the costs of tightened security measures.
The new security clearances that passengers will face are expected "to be quite draconian," said Steve Alterman, president of the Cargo Air Line Assn.
, an industry trade group in Washington.
"We must try to get back to normal business as quickly as we can, just to show these terrorists that they can't shut us down--although they have for at least one day," Alterman said.
"But the new airport security will slow things down."
Several experts said many airlines' contracts would require them to offer full refunds to travelers who fear flying in the wake of the terrorist attacks, and they predicted that airlines would see a drop-off in ticket sales to the tune of hundreds of millions of dollars.
The tragedy Tuesday is known as a force majeure incident beyond the airlines' control.
In such cases, travelers are entitled to a refund or to accept what alternate flights the airlines offer, Trippler said.
American Airlines said it was trying every means possible to get diverted passengers to their destinations or to put them in hotels until air travel resumes.
The airlines also said they will work with passengers to accommodate flight changes.
Midwest Express, for example, said it will waive change fees and refund rules for those scheduled to travel until Monday.
The Milwaukee-based airline said travelers could extend their travel dates for up to one year from the date of ticket issue.
Jersin of Cathay Pacific said that the airline had not received a lot of cancellations, but that any passengers fearful of flying could exchange their tickets without paying a penalty.
"There probably will be people that will not want to fly for a while, and we're very flexible as far as that," she said.
Aaron Gellman, a professor at the Transportation Center at Northwestern University, said the overall effect on the economy could be devastating.
"The airlines are the most vulnerable and would be most affected by this," Gellman said.
"It's impossible to predict with any precision what's going to happen.
This is a very important, watershed event."
Parsons said the attacks could lead to a wholesale review of security measures, particularly those applied to domestic travelers.
"I think in America, we've never had the true fear of travel, like you do in Tel Aviv.
Look at El Al," Parsons said, referring to the Israeli airline. "
They may inspect your bag three times before it gets on the plane.
You go to Europe; you see the dogs and the guns in the airports.
I think high security we've talked about, we've had opportunities to bring in good equipment, but we've never spent the money on it, not on the domestic side."
But he noted that the terrorists who attacked key targets Tuesday evidently didn't need to smuggle bombs aboard planes to inflict unimaginable damage.
A multi-ton airliner is "better than any weapon I can think of," Parsons said.
"With these planes and their fuel tanks full, you had a flying bomb."
Travel experts suggested that a permanent increase in airline security has been long overdue.
"In the past, passengers continuously have agreed in surveys that they would pay more for security," consultant Trippler said.
"How much more remains to be seen.
They've never been told how much more.
Will they pay $10 a ticket, $5 a ticket?
We as consumers have done a lot of complaining on airline lines, but we may have to go back to where everyone is checked in" in person without such timesavers as electronic ticketing.
Greyhound ceased scheduled bus service in the Northeast, and 30 terminals throughout the country temporarily suspended service, including East Los Angeles, San Diego and Sacramento.
The terminals were closed because of their proximity to airports and federal buildings, Greyhound spokeswoman Kristin Parsley said.
Like other airlines, Japan's All Nippon Airways was scrambling Tuesday to figure out how to handle the hundreds of passengers who were being diverted all over North America in search of a safe haven.
Thomas Fredo, an ANA spokesman in New York, said four flights headed for New York, Washington, Los Angeles and San Francisco were diverted to either Vancouver or Detroit.
He said those passengers were likely to spend the night there while officials await further word on when U.S. airspace would reopen.
Fredo, who works in Rockefeller Center, four or five miles north of the World Trade Center, said the attack was horrific.
"I don't have anything to compare this to," he said.
"The only thing this vaguely reminds me of is the day John F. Kennedy was shot."   
Times staff writers Evelyn Iritani and Kathleen Brady in Los Angeles and Kimi Yoshino, John O'Dell and Marc Ballon in Orange County contributed to this story.
Times wire services also contributed. 
: Run to NCAA final eight last March created new challenge for Bibby's talented team: high expectations for season that begins tonight.
Henry Bibby won three consecutive NCAA national championships as UCLA's point guard.
He won an NBA title as a New York Knick rookie.
And as his coaching career was gaining its legs, Bibby took the Tulsa Fast Breakers to a Continental Basketball Assn. championship.
But nothing, the USC coach says, compares to the feelings he had last spring when he guided the Trojans to the Elite Eight of the NCAA tournament.
"I haven't experienced, either playing or coaching, an experience like last year," a reflective Bibby said.
"It was like the greatest moment I ever had in basketball.
The closeness, the relationships you get, the satisfaction of watching it grow, that's what's exciting about it."
Starting the 2001-02 college basketball season, there's a new enthusiasm and excitement enveloping Heritage Hall.
The Trojans' three seniors--Sam Clancy, David Bluthenthal and Brandon Granville--have been approached on campus since the first day of the fall semester, fellow students telling them that USC is fast becoming a basketball school, what with the football team struggling in the early going.
Pretty heady stuff for a college that has won eight national championships in football, though none since 1978, and boasts four Heisman Trophy winners.
"We can, like, taste it, you know?"
Bluthenthal said.
"There's definitely a different atmosphere on campus," Granville said.
And Clancy said, "People are waiting for a winning team to come around and that team is us.
We're gaining respect around the school and the country.
"We're the hunters no longer.
We're the hunted."
Such things happen when you foray deeply into the Big Dance in its current format.
Oh sure, USC made a pair of Final Four appearances in the tournament's dark ages, 1940 and 1954.
But never before had the Trojans won three successive games during March Madness as they did last season in beating Oklahoma State, Boston College and Kentucky.
That success has fostered higher hopes among a growing fan base, and respect is beginning to rear its head nationally.
The Trojans are ranked 24th in the coaches' preseason poll, 20th in the Associated Press media poll and will be ranked 14th by Sports Illustrated.
"Expectations are high and they should be because that's where we want to go," Bibby said.
"We set a level of play where we want to go.
My goal is to get back there but it will take a lot of work and sacrifice.
A lot of things have to fall into place.
"has the three senior starters and seven lettermen back from a team that went 24-10 last season, equaling a school record for victories in a season.
Add to the mix sophomore shooting guard Desmon Farmer, who started 16 times as a freshman, and junior center Kostas Charissis, who has started 14 games for USC but will begin the season serving a three-game suspension, and the Trojans essentially have five returning starters.
's newcomers are athletic as well as skilled.
Sophomore junior college transfer Jerry Dupree will play as a shot-blocking swingman and freshmen Rory O'Neil, a 6-foot-11 center, and Nick Curtis, a 6-8 forward, will add to the Trojans' rebounding totals.
Twin guards Errick and Derrick Craven, freshmen from Torrance Bishop Montgomery High, will get playing time, Errick possibly starting when Bibby goes to a three-guard lineup.
Offensively, USC wants to run and with Clancy the main threat down low, the Trojans will also have to convert from the perimeter when opposing defenses close down on him.
On the other side of the ball, Bibby said, the Trojans will run more than 10 defenses.
But USC's fortunes ride upon the shoulders of its seniors.
Bibby has been hard on them during preseason practices.
He didn't start Bluthenthal in either exhibition game, saying he hadn't played well enough in practice to warrant starting, and he sat both Bluthenthal and Clancy in the second exhibition after Bluthenthal skipped a sociology class and Clancy missed a team meeting.
"The seniors haven't been good," Bibby said early in workouts.
"There's a coolness about them.
They have to realize that last year was last year."
Bluthenthal said Monday that he's ready.
"I had to do a little soul-searching, and start practicing harder."
Bibby theorized that with the gap in talent closing between the starters and newcomers, maybe his seniors haven't been sloughing off after all, that the underclassmen are that good.
That would be a good problem to have.
Either way, Bibby said, he now has the talent to go deeper on the bench.
That brought a smile to the face of Granville, who averaged 34.4 minutes last year and relishes getting a breather.
" The bench is looking deeper and deeper every day with the new guys playing as well as they have," he said.
"Coach is going to have to put them on the floor.
He can't keep them on the bench.
"But game to game, I'm sure that's going to change because you can't replace experience
and I think that's something me, Sam and Dave bring to the team."
Indeed.
Bibby said if he were to make a mistake, he'd err on the side of sticking with his veterans too long in games.
After all, they're the ones who gave him the ride of his basketball life last March.
"Last season was like a taste of honey," Bibby said.
"The players saw all the hoopla.
Now, they want to do it again.
It was like the light turned on."
The Elite Eight put us on the map.
Every recruit saw us.
It's gotten us into recruits' homes.
It brought us out of the dark ages."
Last season: 24-10 overall, 11-7 Pacific 10 Conference.
Finish: Tied for fourth in conference, advanced to the East Regional final of the NCAA tournament as a No. 6-seeded team, beating Oklahoma State, Boston College and Kentucky before falling to eventual national champion Duke.
Coach: Henry Bibby, sixth season, 81-67.
Who's gone:
Brian Scalabrine, Jeff Trepagnier, Jarvis Turner, Nate Hair, Tyler Murphy.
Coaches Silvey Dominguez and David Miller.
Who's new:
Guards Derrick and Errick Craven, forwards Nick Curtis and Jerry Dupree and center Rory O'Neil.
Projected starters: Forwards David Bluthenthal (13.5 points, 6.8 rebounds) and Sam Clancy (17.3 points, 7.5 rebounds), guards Errick Craven (19.9 points, 6.8 rebounds at Torrance Bishop Montgomery High), Desmon Farmer (6.4 points, 2.8 rebounds) and Brandon Granville (12.4 points, 6.1 assists).
Keys to season: Bibby being able to go deeper on his bench and trusting his new assistants.
The Trojan coach was impressed with his newcomers as he went 10 deep in exhibition games.
The ability and availability of competent reserves means Granville, iron man that he is, must not be on the court for more than 35 minutes a game.
Also, Bibby has restructured his coaching staff with new assistants Kurtis Townsend, who last worked at Michigan, and Eric Brown, from Cal State Northridge, joining second-year assistant coach Damon Archibald.
Outlook:
The No. 20 Trojans have been enigmatic in the preseason with Bibby trying to light a fire under his seniors.
USC still is riding high after its run to the Elite Eight and has the talent to win the preseason NIT and enter Pac-10 play unscathed at 12-0.
But given the fact that the starting lineup did not play together in the exhibitions (Granville missed the first game because of a mouth injury and Bluthenthal and Clancy sat out the second on suspension)
, no one would be that surprised if the Trojans lose tonight to Wyoming.
Besides, it would give USC almost two more weeks of practice until its next game.
Sometimes looking out the window is more reliable than reading these instruments.
Weather is usually boring in Southern California--haze in the morning, sun in the afternoon, no precipitation and a layer of fog and smog to hide mountains and other land forms.
But that all changes in the mid-winter months when we traditionally get rain showers, hail and the kind of crisp, brilliantly clear days that made this area a promised land to weather-weary East Coasters.
This is about the only time of year when a home weather station is of interest, even in this era of instant weather reports and forecasts on the Internet.
Southern California is made up of so many mini-climes--some separated by only a few city blocks--that personal weather instruments can provide meaningful information.
And in this digital era, a home setup can provide not only readings of the current temperature and humidity, but also process barometric pressure data to produce a short-term forecast.
Two companies that make digital gadgets--La Crosse Technology (www.lacrosse technology.com) and Oregon Scientific (www.oregonscientific.com)--sell compact home weather stations for about $100.
The basic readout units are upright, tastefully designed devices that could fit the decor of just about any desk that harbors a computer.
They also could go nicely on a kitchen countertop, window ledge or alcove, or even a bedroom nightstand.
Both units tested came with alarm clocks controlled via radio waves by a government atomic clock.
They also came with wireless, supposedly weatherproof sensors that can be attached to fences, balcony railings and other outdoor structures for monitoring outside conditions.
The big question: Are these little weather stations toys or reasonably scientific instruments?
Last weekend's rainstorm offered a chance to find out.
Setting up both models--the La Crosse WS-7078UF and Oregon Scientific BAR112HGA--seemed deceptively simple.
The temptation was to pop batteries into the main units and sensors, and then start playing junior weather forecaster.
I learned the hard way to follow the directions, step by step.
For example, the batteries should go first into the wireless sensor and then the main unit if they are to make a solid radio connection.
Also, in perusing the La Crosse manual I discovered that the forecast indicator on this type of unit works by monitoring trends in barometric pressure, so it isn't of much use until it sits in one spot for at least 12 hours.
Taking the unit up or down even one floor in a building will affect barometric pressure readings, throwing the forecast off.
The clocks can be adjusted manually, but for exact settings they are supposed to align themselves via radio signals overnight.
The La Crosse unit picked up the radio signals nicely but the Oregon Scientific never did, indicating the signal was too weak where it sat (right next to the La Crosse).
This was especially odd because a nearby radio-controlled alarm clock also from Oregon Scientific has picked up the signal nightly for more than a year.
The La Crosse outdoor sensor attached easily to a wood fence with a couple of provided screws.
Once in place, a plastic hat went over the sensor to protect it from rain.
The Oregon Scientific sensor was more problematic to mount as the company did not provide screws.
By Saturday morning, both the main units and sensors had been in place for more than 12 hours.
The La Crosse readout panel included both the indoor and outdoor data.
The Oregon Scientific front panel showed only the indoor readings--a button had to be pushed to get the outdoor data.
Score one for La Crosse.
There was little difference between the units in their temperature readings.
If they varied, it was usually by less than a degree.
Relatively humidity was another story.
The readings would often vary by 10 or more percentage points.
I tended to trust the Oregon Scientific readings more, because when the rain came down in buckets it was showing 98% outdoor humidity while the La Crosse showed a suspiciously low 84%.
The forecast mode was the most problematic.
On Saturday afternoon, the La Crosse unit was predicting partly cloudy skies with clearer weather on the way.
It finally started to predict rain on Sunday at 6 a.m., but by late morning was back to its partly cloudy forecast.
On Saturday afternoon, the Oregon Scientific unit predicted rain, but it also began to lose a bit of confidence Sunday about 9 a.m., when it also began forecasting partly cloudy.
The rainfall began with sprinkles Sunday at 11 a.m. and was in full storm mode by midafternoon.
By 5 p.m., the National Weather Service issued a "Special Weather Statement" to warn against effects of the storm.
The Oregon Scientific unit did a bit better in forecasting the rain.
But it lost major points when, in the middle of the storm, the link between its outdoor sensor and main unit failed.
I reestablished it briefly with a manual restart
but then the link quit.
I brought the sensor inside, opened it up and discovered that water had seeped inside.
Once dried off it began working again, but it's an obvious drawback for an outdoor sensor if it falters during a rainstorm.
Both weather stations had good and bad aspects.
The La Crosse main unit was easier to read and its outdoor sensor weathered the storm, but it didn't do quite as good a job in foreseeing the wet weather.
The Oregon Scientific did better at forecasting, but it lost points when its outdoor sensor got soggy.
Also, its radio clock never successfully caught the atomic clock signals.
It's hard to give either of them a passing grade, except on looks.
David Colker covers personal technology.
He can be reached at david.colker@latimes.com.
If you want other stories on this topic, search the Archives at latimes.com/archives .
For information about reprinting this article, go to www.lats.com/rights .
Indianapolis Colt running back Edgerrin James will sit out at least two more games because of a knee injury, but quarterback Peyton Manning is expected to play Sunday despite a broken jaw.
James, the two-time NFL rushing champion, was hurt in the Colts' victory over Kansas City Oct. 25 and did not play the past two weeks.
They are the first games he has missed in his three-year pro career.
James practiced late in the week after his injury but felt some swelling and stiffness in his left knee.
Further tests showed ligament damage.
"Our doctors felt it was appropriate to shut him down for another two or three weeks," Colts' President Bill Polian said Monday.
"They're not certain what the severity is."
Manning, who has started every game for Indianapolis the past four seasons, suffered a hairline fracture of his jaw in Sunday's 27-24 loss to the Miami Dol-phins.
Denver Bronco running back Terrell Davis suffered torn cartilage in his left knee and will probably sit out two games, the latest setback for a player sidelined most of the past three seasons.
Davis' arthroscopic knee surgery will keep him off the field for about 10 days, meaning he will be sidelined for Sunday's home game against Washington and probably a Thanksgiving Day game in Dallas.
Davis injured his knee on a hit in the second quarter of Sunday's 26-16 victory over San Diego.
He played the rest of the game, rushing for 83 yards in 33 carries.
George Seifert tried to dodge questions about his future as Carolina's coach, reluctantly saying he plans to return to the Panthers next season.
Seifert, 16-25 in two-plus seasons with the Panthers, is riding an eight-game losing streak, including Sunday's 48-14 loss to the St. Louis Rams.
When asked if he wants to continue coaching next season, Seifert initially tried to deflect the question.
Seifert has two years remaining on a five-year deal.
"I think that's really not the issue," he said.
"The issue is this football game and our next game.
Maybe there is nothing else to ask, so we'll ask the old standby--
Is he coming back?"
Buffalo quarterback Rob Johnson will be sidelined three to five weeks after breaking his right collarbone during the Bills' 21-11 loss to New England.
Johnson was injured in the fourth quarter when he fell on his throwing shoulder after being sacked by Terrell Buckley.
He left the game and was replaced by Alex Van Pelt.
Van Pelt will start for the first time since the 1996 season.
Johnson has had several injuries in the past three seasons, including last year when he missed five starts and was knocked out of four other games.
Denver Coach Mike Shanahan will meet with his team before making a decision on wide receiver Eddie Kennison, who told the coach he was retiring and then reconsidered.
The meeting with players and coaches will be on Wednesday, Shanahan said, and their input will factor into a final decision.
Kennison was declared inactive for the game against San Diego after telling Shanahan on Saturday night that he had lost his passion for the game and no longer wanted to play.
New England Patriot Coach Bill Belichick expects quarterback Drew Bledsoe to be cleared to return to practice this week and possibly be ready to play in the Patriots' game Sunday against St. Louis.
However, Belichick has not decided whether he will replace Tom Brady, who is 5-2 as a starter since Bledsoe, the No. 1 quarterback, as was sidelined by a chest injury.
The MRI on San Diego Charger safety Rodney Harrison's left knee revealed a strained--rather than a torn--medial collateral ligament.
President Bush signed legislation Friday that expands the reach of law enforcement authorities trying to track terrorists, calling the measure "an essential step in defeating terrorism, while protecting the constitutional rights of all Americans."
The measure was approved Thursday by the Senate on a 98-1 vote, and by a 356-66 vote in the House a day earlier.
Speaking in the White House East Room to an audience of Cabinet officials, senior members of Congress and law enforcement officers, Bush cast the measure as urgently needed to bring legal provisions in line with emerging technology available to terrorists.
"We're dealing with terrorists who operate by highly sophisticated methods and technologies, some of which were not even available when our existing laws were written," he said.
The measure moved with rare speed through Congress in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
Presenting the need as extraordinary, Bush said: "We've seen the enemy, and the murder of thousands of innocent, unsuspecting people.
They recognize no barrier of morality.
They have no conscience.
The terrorists cannot be reasoned with.
Witness the recent anthrax attacks through our Postal Service."
Atty.
Gen. John Ashcroft pledged to use the powers to pursue terrorist suspects relentlessly.
"Let the terrorists be warned," he said in a speech to the nation's mayors.
"If you overstay your visas even by one day, we will arrest you; if you violate a local law, we will . . .
work to make sure that you are put in jail and be kept in custody as long as possible."
The measure expands the government's opportunities to conduct wiretaps, broadens the list of terrorism-related crimes, provides subpoena power to obtain credit card and bank account information and loosens restrictions on sharing information among law enforcement agencies.
Some of the provisions that have been updated, Bush said, date to the rotary phone era.
Bush also noted "the courage the Postal Service has shown during these difficult times."
"I want to assure postal workers that our government is testing more than 200 postal facilities along the entire Eastern corridor that may have been impacted," Bush said.
"And we will move quickly to treat and protect workers where positive exposures are found."
No daunting lines greeted passengers Monday at Southern California's regional airports.
Traffic did not raise blood pressure.
Parking was plentiful.
The experience was very different from that at Los Angeles International Airport, where lengthy waits and other headaches nagged passengers trying to fly for the first time since last week's terrorist attacks.
West Hollywood resident Elaine Curtis, 31, was waiting at a Burbank Airport terminal for a flight to Texas. "
Did you see the parking lot?
" she asked.
"There's nobody here."
Airport and airline officials attributed the uncrowded terminals to the reduced number of flights and fewer passengers for routes that were in service.
At Burbank, planes that used to be packed were half empty, spokesman Victor Gill said.
The airport also experienced a cut in flights Monday, from the usual 160 arrivals and departures to 134.
Similarly, flights were down at John Wayne Airport in Orange County, with 200 takeoffs and landings compared with the usual 250.
Around noon Monday, no one waited at the airport's ticket counters in the main terminal.
Bag inspections were brisk.
"As you can see, it's all empty," said Corinne Leister, a retiree who volunteers at John Wayne Airport every Monday, helping passengers with directions.
"It's quiet.
And when a plane does land, there's not a planeload of people."
Regional airport officials thought travel would be busier Monday because fewer hurdles exist for many passengers who--unlike those at LAX--can still be dropped off directly in front of terminals and park in the closest lots.
But there was no noticeable spillover from LAX.
"It's difficult to speculate," said Maria Tesoro, a spokeswoman for the Ontario airport.
"We don't know if passengers are coming from LAX."
Ontario passengers said they appreciated their hassle-free experience.
Many said they also felt safer.
"I'm going to think twice about flying out of LAX now," said Peggy Reyes, an Indio resident who returned Monday from Midway Airport in Chicago.
"The terrorists . . .
are not going to come out here like they would LAX," Reyes said.
At the normally sleepy Long Beach field, things were even quieter than usual Monday.
Taxis were no longer allowed to wait in front of the terminal because of security concerns.
Instead, cabbies were told to park just outside airport grounds and were radioed when needed.
Fabian Garcia, 19, a medical equipment technician from Dallas, was saying goodbye Monday to relatives and friends he had been visiting.
"It looks the same as it did when I came in," Garcia said, sitting in a shady section between the baggage claim and the main terminal. "
The only thing difference is that there aren't any taxis over there."   
Time Staff Writers Zanto Peabody, Nancy Wride and Buck Wargo contributed to this report.
Rally:
Many at a Buena Park gathering say they'll return after the fighting to help.
About 300 Southern California Afghan Americans gathered Saturday in Buena Park for an unusual meeting that was reminiscent of both a peace rally and a rousing political campaign as they discussed plans to rebuild Afghanistan. 
Many enlisted to return there if the Taliban is overthrown, vowing to help restart schools, hospitals and a democratic government.
They are resting their hopes on the deposed Afghan King Mohammad Zaher Shah, who is calling for an emergency loya jirga, or grand assembly, with a broad-based tribal government. 
The council had been proposed to consist of 120 members, with representation from the anti-Taliban Northern Alliance, Pushtuns and other Afghan tribes.
On Saturday, allies of the exiled king called for expanding the group to between 150 and 200 members to help form a temporary government. 
The popular king is widely viewed as the only leader with the unifying power to return peace to the troubled country.
Shah, 87, has agreed to serve as the symbolic figurehead, but said he would step aside after the election of a new leader. 
"All the doors had closed.
Only one door was there and behind that door was the king," said Abdul Malek Siddiqi of San Diego, one of the meeting organizers and a former judge in Afghanistan. 
"Only the door that led to Zaher Shah had to be opened.
This is the will of the nation, and every eye of this nation is waiting for him to take over," Siddiqi said. 
Shah, who ascended to the throne when he was 19, took the country's helm in 1933 when his father was assassinated.
He reigned for 30 years, then was overthrown in 1973 by his cousin Sardar Mohammad Daoud.
He has not stepped foot in Afghanistan since the coup. 
The king's grandson and special assistant, Prince Mostapha Zaher, said in an earlier telephone interview from Rome that the king is willing and able to serve. 
"His majesty is in good mental and physical health despite his age," Zaher said.
"He is doing remarkably well." 
The younger Zaher was expected to address Saturday's gathering by speaker phone as part of an effort to rally support for the king's peace plan, but did not at the last moment.
He said he has begun compiling lists of volunteers who are willing to help bring peace to Afghanistan. 
"I sincerely believe that it is the duty of every Afghan man and woman to aid in the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Afghanistan," Zaher said.
"So far, the response has been very positive.
I'm confident that many Afghans will accept the risks involved and will assist in the very difficult task of rebuilding Afghanistan's shattered infrastructure." 
But before rebuilding can begin, many Afghans were seeking assurances Saturday that peace will prevail--that the United States and other countries won't neglect Afghanistan after the fighting stops. 
One of the king's assistants, former Afghanistan Minister of Justice Abdul Sattar Sirat, a professor, told the crowd via telephone from Rome that the king is negotiating with the United Nations to support a security coalition that would form a "backbone of peace." 
Rep. Ed Royce (R-Fullerton), who attended Saturday's meeting, said the United States has a duty to "right a wrong."
The United States has pledged $320 million in humanitarian assistance. 
"We owe--and the world owes--the Afghan people," Royce said.
"We must make sure we go forward and do not make the mistakes of the past." 
The Bush administration has said it doesn't want to repeat a U.S. peacekeeping role as in Bosnia and Kosovo.
Royce said one solution is to have Afghan troops backed by the United Nations. 
Several people also questioned the roles of Pakistan, India and Iran in the nation-building process.
On that point, Royce's answer met applause and a standing ovation. 
"We want the leaders of other countries in that region to get out and stay out as we rebuild Afghanistan," he said.
"Let's stay the course.
Let's see this through."
A top security official resigned Wednesday after his agents tried to raid a leading independent television station, prompting fears of a crackdown on media freedom in this former Soviet republic.
Georgian President Eduard A. Shevardnadze accepted the resignation of Security Minister Vakhtang Kutateladze as the "right" decision.
But Shevardnadze also criticized Rustavi 2 television station for defying a court order to open its financial records for examination.
"There is no threat for the freedom of speech in Georgia," Shevardnadze said.
"It is inviolable."
He said he supported Kutateladze's resignation because "there is still an impression that the methods used by the Security Ministry were not very well thought of."
Thirty security agents showed up for the search Tuesday, acting on a warrant saying the company had evaded taxes.
They were denied entry by the company director and retreated, to the jeers of about 500 Rustavi supporters.
Television officials accused agents of trying to take over the station, a charge Shevardnadze denied.
Rustavi 2 is widely respected in Georgia and is known for criticizing corruption and other abuses by state authorities.
Timing, like most subtle political skills, has never been Al Gore's strength.
But whether by luck or design, Gore now may be approaching a harmonious convergence of moment and messenger.
How he handles that opportunity could reveal much about the way Gore will position himself against President Bush in the coming months--and even in a potential 2004 rematch.
For the last nine months, Gore has been doing his best Calvin Coolidge imitation; he's been "Silent Al," whittling away, keeping his thoughts to himself.
When Gore resurfaced recently with a beard, it seemed to confirm the suspicion that he had been marooned on a desert island all these months.
But Gore recently agreed to deliver the keynote speech late next month at the annual Jefferson-Jackson Day dinner of the Iowa Democratic Party.
With an enormous press corps expected to gather in Des Moines, the evening will provide the former vice president with his first chance to talk to the nation since he conceded the presidential election last December.
And, now, the Bush administration may have given him something to talk about.
During last year's campaign, Gore routinely changed his consultants, his look and even his persona; he was a blue-suited New Democrat one day and an earth-toned populist the next.
But one thing was utterly constant: From the moment Bush first announced his tax cut proposal in December 1999, Gore insisted that the plan would wipe out the massive surpluses projected for the coming decade and plunge the federal budget back into deficit.
Even as Bush was initially releasing the proposal, Gore described it as a "reckless tax scheme that would immediately put our country back into deficit."
Nearly a year later, in his first debate with Bush, Gore again charged that the tax cut was "the surest way to put our budget into deficit."
Anyone who watched the debates--or, for that matter, "Saturday Night Live"--remembers Gore's alternative: He would cut taxes less, spend more on education and health care, pay down the national debt faster and place all money raised by the Social Security and Medicare payroll taxes in a "lockbox."
Gore talked about a lockbox so often that many listeners probably wanted to stuff him into one by the time the debates were done.
But Gore was so annoying about placing Social Security off-limits that people might remember it more than almost anything else he said last year.
"People laugh about the lockbox; it has kind of the 'Saturday Night' quality to it," says one high-ranking Democratic strategist.
"
But people remember that's what Gore said.
As you move forward, people are going to remember that there was a choice about the surplus."
Fast forward to last week.
In its midyear update, Bush's Office of Management and Budget disclosed that the budget surplus was melting so fast (a victim mostly of the tax cut and the slowing economy) that the report's title could have been lifted from Hollywood: "Gone With the Wind" or "Honey, I Shrunk the Surplus."
Leaving aside the surplus in Social Security--which both parties have pledged not to use to pay for other programs--OMB said the rest of the government's accounts this year would produce a surplus of only $1 billion.
Earlier, OMB had estimated that the non-Social Security surplus, also known as the operating budget surplus, would reach $128 billion this year.
In last week's report, OMB said the operating budget surplus would remain at $1 billion in 2002 and rise to just $2 billion in 2003 and $6 billion in the election year of 2004.
(Last April, OMB projected a combined surplus for those three years of $427 billion.)
That means if economic growth is even slightly below the optimistic 3.2% the administration projects, or if spending is only a bit higher, in any of the next four years the federal government could again be forced to tap Social Security to pay for other programs--the now commonly accepted definition, in both parties, of a budget deficit.
Indeed, many analysts expect that the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office's analysis, due out Tuesday, will show the government dipping into Social Security again.
Which is, without much equivocation, exactly what Gore had predicted would happen.
Now, the question is whether Gore uses his Iowa stage to say, in so many words, "I told you so."
For both Gore and his party, the choice isn't simple.
Democrats are aggressively criticizing Bush over the shrinking surplus numbers, and some feel Gore could enormously amplify that message with the megaphone he'll have in Iowa.
Others worry that inserting Gore into the mix personalizes the argument in a way that obscures the larger point.
Gore faces contradictory pressures himself.
Any successful Gore campaign in 2004 would have to convince Americans that they took a wrong turn by accepting Bush's agenda over his own in 2000; a tough indictment of Bush's budget record in Iowa would begin the long process of selling such an argument.
But some intimates worry that Gore would personally alienate voters again if he seemed to be insisting that he had been right all along.
"People would tune it off because it sounds arrogant," said one close advisor.
(A better early strategy, this advisor advises, is for Gore to limit his jabs at Bush and swaddle them in jokes.)
If Gore joins the argument over the squeezed surplus, he'll also face the same challenge that's so far stumped congressional Democrats: whether to call for rolling back or delaying the tax cut to keep the budget safely in the black.
Bush is defending the shrinking surplus as a way to keep money away from Washington big-spenders; he's already portraying his Democratic critics as closet tax-hikers more intent on enlarging government than reducing the national debt--an argument that hurt Gore in 2000.
Before Gore throws a punch, he'll have to be prepared to take one.
Friends say Gore is only just beginning to work through what he'll say in Iowa. "
He has probably as much, if not more, credibility than anybody in the party on the deficit issue," says one confidant.
"It's just a question of timing.
And that's what he is going to struggle with in the next couple of weeks."
The question is also one of tone: Can Gore renew his old arguments with Bush without sounding self-righteous?
Early as it is, the Iowa dinner will test whether Gore can find a way to say "I told you so" without sounding like someone saying "I told you so."
Ronald Brownstein's column appears every Monday.
See current and past Brownstein columns on The Times' Web site at: http://www.latimes.com/brownstein.
The Web site of the World Economic Forum crashed Friday, and cyber-activists claimed they took it down in a "virtual sit-in." 
Forum officials said they were trying to determine what brought the site down.
They originally attributed the failure to "overuse," but messages posted on a Web site called Indymedia.org.
took credit for the crash. 
Anti-globalization groups urging Internet users to join the cyberattacks identified themselves as Electronic Disturbance Theater, Electronic Civil Disobedience and the Federation of Random Action. 
"We regard it as a nuisance.
We hope the site goes back up soon," said Charles McLean, the forum's communications director. 
McLean said technicians were struggling Friday to restore the site, which carries the forum's press releases and other information at www.weforum.org. 
Coordinating a cyberattack requires minimal sophistication and the tools are readily available on the Internet. 
Last year, computer hackers stole credit card details and other personal information for hundreds of World Economic Forum participants off the Internet, including former President Clinton, South African President Thabo Mbeki, Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat and others. 
McLean said security experts had patched security holes in the organization's servers after last year's breaches. 
For a conference that prides itself on deft use of cutting-edge technology, the World Economic Forum has been plagued by a surprising slew of technical glitches. 
On Thursday, guests lined up for an hour or longer to receive free Compaq iPAQ handheld computers, equipped with short-range wireless modems that allow participants to receive e-mail and register for panel discussions. 
But for many, the wait wasn't worth it. 
"The wireless connection was somewhat capricious -- very slow," said Dani Rodrik, a Harvard University economist who spoke at the conference. 
Outside the Waldorf-Astoria hotel conference site, the connection didn't work at all, guests said. 
One gadget that did win guests' praise was the hologram-equipped identity badge system.
All 3,000 guests and reporters at the conference must wear the badges to enter the forum's two hotel sites and the badges can be used to log on to a network of computer kiosks. 
The kiosks allow guests to register in advance for panel discussions, and send e-mail to all conference participants -- from Jordan's King Abdullah to Microsoft Corp.
Chairman Bill Gates. 
The five-day forum provides meeting time for the world's movers-and-shakers to swap ideas about the global economy.
Superman had heat vision, X-ray vision, telescopic vision and microscopic vision.
Today, you can wield a power even Superman didn't have: night vision.
A new group of inexpensive monoculars and binoculars lets you see in the dark.
Anybody who boats after the sun goes down should give serious consideration to having a night-vision device on board.
They can keep you from running aground and help you see your rigging in foul weather.
The gizmos are idiot simple.
You turn them on, look through them and focus them.
The images are just like what you see on TV: grainy and green, but with surprising detail.
For example, a printed sign can be easily read from about 20 yards away.
Most of the night-vision gadgets on the market are hand-held monoculars, meaning you peer through them with one eye, like a sailor's spyglass.
Binocular devices also are available, at about twice the price of a monocular, which range from $200 to $500.
More expensive still are goggles designed to be worn on the head.
Why not just save some money and use a spotlight?
Single source illumination--the sort of light you get from one bulb--makes it harder to see within shadows.
And shadows conceal all sorts of hazards, like a barely submerged rock.
Night-vision devices let you see within shadows.
Technically, night-vision gizmos amplify light, which means they increase light from the stars and any other light source.
Remember that scene in "The Silence of the Lambs" where Agent Starling is trapped in a blacked-out basement?
As she desperately struggles to find a crazed killer, he hovers inches away, watching her through light-amplification goggles.
That couldn't happen.
Night vision won't work in the absence of light.
Many night-vision devices get around that by building in an infrared emitter that floods an area with invisible light.
They work fine with infrared light, but you'll lose your ability to be invisible; the infrared emitter glows like Rudolph's nose.
There are three different levels, or "generations," of night-vision equipment.
The affordable devices designed for consumers are known as Generation I. Generation II and Generation III also are available in stores, but cost thousands of dollars and are used by the military.
Each successive generation provides better images and longer battery life, at a higher cost.
Are these things fun?
The truth is, seeing in the dark is like taking off a day in the middle of the week to go people-watching.
The good news is there aren't any crowds.
The bad news is there's not a lot to look at.
Bottom line: If Superman couldn't do it, it probably wasn't all that cool to start with.
We tested five Generation I devices from three distributors in various locations and weather conditions.
The brand name isn't especially important, because most Generation I gear is made in Russia and relabeled for export.
For instance, the Bushnell model 26-2042W waterproof monocular looks identical to the Night Owl Optics NONO3Y.
The $300 Bushnell 26-3652, a black, business-like monocular, took top honors.
It's got a large, 52-millimeter objective lens combined with 3.6x image magnification.
The combination is a great compromise of magnification, clarity and weight.
The higher the magnification, the more light you lose, and the dimmer the image becomes.
That's why astronomers need huge telescopes; bigger scopes pull in more light, which allows for increased magnification.
The 26-3652 runs on two AA batteries; most of the other devices we tested use exotic lithium batteries designed for cameras.
The device gets low marks for its clumsy battery compartment, which requires a screwdriver to open and close.
The external mount on the infrared emitter also was a poor design choice.
Every other device we tested has the infrared emitter--used to see in total darkness--integrated within the housing.
The 26-3652's emitter plugs into a slot on the side, where it could easily be knocked off.
Resolution was excellent for a hundred yards.
Shadows beneath the lifeguard towers on the Santa Monica beach late at night concealed nothing from this device, including two lovers entwined in the sand.
And let us never speak of that particular experiment again.
Runner-up is the $300 MB-3 from Newcon Optik.
It comes dressed in rain-slicker yellow, apparently the international symbol for "I'm waterproof!"
It has a large 56mm objective lens but offers only 2.4x magnification.
It runs on two AAA batteries and performed well over long distances.
This was the smallest and lightest device we tested, but you pay for that with decreased magnification, which kept it from getting the top spot.
Two of our least favorite monoculars were the $200 Night Owl NONO3Y and the apparently identical $300 Bushnell 26-2042W.
The Night Owl claims a 3.1x magnification and a 42mm objective lens.
But there was no detectable difference between it and the Bushnell 26-2042W, which only claims 2x magnification with its 42mm objective lens.
Both are waterproof--you can tell because they're yellow--and lightweight.
But these devices only would be useful over a fairly small area, maybe 50 yards, tops.
Plus, they use those annoying camera batteries.
The only detectable difference between the two is in the labeling.
Oh, and the Night Owl has a much trimmer, cooler case.
The worst-of-show has the highest price tag, the $700 Bushnell 26-3150 binoculars.
They have a 50mm objective lens and 3.1x magnification.
That power, combined with the depth perception available with the binocular format should have made these a standout.
But they're unacceptable on nearly every level.
*
The good: You don't have to go through life with this around your neck.
If you want other stories on this topic, search the Archives at latimes.com/archives .
For information about reprinting this article, go to www.lats.com/rights .
A leading suspect in a plot to attack the U.S. Embassy in Paris has told a French judge that Afghanistan's Taliban regime made a "pact" with Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida network and would have had to approve terrorist acts like the Sept. 11 suicide hijackings.
Djamel Beghal, who French authorities believe is linked to bin Laden, told anti-terror Judge Jean-Louis Bruguiere of the pact during questioning in Paris on Oct. 1.
The case file, which is sealed to the public, was shown to The Associated Press on Thursday.
It is not clear to what extent Beghal had access to top al-Qaida members and Taliban officials or how he knew about any agreements that may have been made between the two groups.
However, in his first interrogation in the United Arab Emirates, Beghal spoke in detail about being recruited and meeting at bin Laden's Afghanistan home with Abu Zubaydah, one of the suspected terrorist mastermind's top aide.
Beghal also said he spent time at training camps in Afghanistan.
Beghal later recanted some of his Dubai testimony, claiming it was extracted under physical duress, his lawyer said.
During 11 hours of testimony on Oct. 1 before the French magistrate, Beghal told of the agreement between the Taliban and bin Laden.
The pact was made in May, Beghal told the judge, according to the case file.
"None of the terrorist operations of al-Qaida could have been decided after May 2001 except with the accord of the Taliban and their chief, Mullah (Mohammed) Omar," Beghal said.
He added: "Al-Qaida is an integral part of the Taliban regime and its political and military structures."
Beghal said that after the pact, the Taliban closed all training camps in the country that were not linked to bin Laden.
Dan Goure, a counterterrorism expert at the Washington-based Lexington Institute said the testimony "ratchets everything up.
"
"If true, it clearly documents a symbiotic relationship between al-Qaida and the Taliban."
Goure said it would also show that U.S. attempt to get the Taliban "to turn over bin Laden were just impossible."
Beghal, 36, a French-Algerian, was arrested in late July in Dubai with a false passport, and extradited to France after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
In Paris, he has been placed under investigation for alleged participation in the plot to blow up the U.S. Embassy in Paris and other targets.
He admitted to the plot while in detention in Dubai, but during the questioning in Paris, Beghal denied having orders to carry out any attack, said his French lawyer, Fabrice Dubest.
Judicial officials have said they still take seriously Beghal's earlier testimony, which led to a number of other arrests  including that of the suspected suicide bomber in the embassy plot.
Nizar Trabelsi, a Tunisian who once played professional soccer in Germany, was arrested Sept. 13 in Belgium.
In the earlier testimony, Beghal described meeting bin Laden operatives at mosques in Britain and then traveling to Afghanistan for weapons training at an al-Qaida camp, according to officials who have seen the testimony.
Beghal is in custody along with eight other suspects.
Investigators are now examining cell phone records, computer disks, and various documents found in the possession of the suspects, including Kamal Daoudi, a 27-year-old computer student who once worked at a cybercafe.
Daoudi has been described as the suspected communications chief behind the plot.
All nine suspects are charged with "criminal association in relation to a terrorist enterprise" -- a charge that brings a maximum of 10 years in jail.
It could well be a year or even two before the investigation ends and the suspects go to trial or are released. 
Copyright 2001 Associated Press
   Two powerful women are the leading contenders in parliamentary elections Monday, and their bitter rivalry is likely to mean that the voting won't put an end to Bangladesh's crippling political violence and strikes.
The two former prime ministers seldom meet and never talk.
Each suspects the other's family had a role in the violence that killed relatives who were national leaders -- Hasina's father and Zia's husband.
"There is no doubt one of the two women will become the next prime minister.
But I'm not sure if the loser will concede defeat and leave the winner alone," said Abdur Rashid, a convenience store owner.
Rashid, whose business was shut down by 100 days of general strikes called by Zia during Hasina's just-ended term, echoed the frustration of many among the 130 million people of Bangladesh.
Of those, 75 million are eligible to vote for the 300-member Jatiya Sangsad, or parliament.
The party or alliance with the most votes will choose the next prime minister.
The campaign has been one of Bangladesh's deadliest -- more than 125 people have been killed since mid-July -- and the prospect of more violence no matter who wins has provoked apathy among some voters.
Since a popular movement restored democracy in 1990, Bangladesh's political scene has been dominated by violence and general strikes.
Hasina launched strikes and quit parliament when Zia was prime minister in 1991-1996.
Zia used the same tactics against Hasina, her successor.
When Hasina left office July 15, power was transferred to a caretaker administration.
Hasina, 54, is the daughter of the country's slain independence leader and first president, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.
Zia, 56, is the widow of general-turned-president Ziaur Rahman, assassinated in a 1981 military coup.
The two men were not related.
The two women dislike each other so much they don't exchange greetings.
Their first public appearance together in two years was in August at a dinner the caretaker administration held for former President Carter.
He came to assess the country's election preparations but has decided not to monitor the vote because of security concerns after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on the United States.
Last year, strikes led by Zia's party cost $3.3 billion in lost production and exports -- nearly 60 percent of the annual export income in a country where nearly half the population have difficultly affording food.
The two main parties -- Hasina's Awami League and Zia's Bangladesh Nationalist Party -- have promised to promote democracy, end corruption and reduce poverty.
But neither would promise to refrain from strikes or to remain in parliament should it lose the election.
Zia told reporters last week she knew the strikes were harming the economy but said "the bad policies of the past government" forced the strikes.
Hasina, asked if she would accept defeat, replied, "We are ready to sit in the opposition only after we consider the elections free and fair." 
In new law's wake, U.S. residents seek office in Mexican hometowns.
They tout know-how and desire to improve lives, but critics fear the spread of El Norte's influence.
Thirty years after Andres Bermudez illegally entered the United States stuffed in a car trunk, he came home this month with a marching band and dinner for everyone in his old neighborhood.
Decked out in fancy Western wear, sunglasses and gold jewelry, Bermudez--now known as the "Tomato King" for the plentiful harvests on his 600-acre spread in central California's Yolo County-- appealed for votes to become the town's mayor in Sunday's elections.
As he walked from business to business on the dusty streets, shaking hands and kissing babies, his staffers broke out in song: "He's here.
He's here, the guy who will take out the ruling party!"
Bermudez's brashness has made him the talk of Jerez, a city of 40,000 in the central state of Zacatecas.
He and two other U.S. residents are the first to campaign for Mexican elective office since the country's "dual nationality" provision went into effect in 1998, allowing Mexicans who had become citizens of other countries to regain their nationality and property rights in their homeland.
On the campaign trail, the burly 51-year-old Bermudez steps from his late-model Chevrolet pickup in his snakeskin cowboy boots to talk with farmers in huaraches.
Alongside the dirt road, he promises to erase corruption and bring the U.S. work ethic and technology to the Mexican countryside.
Bermudez and the other two U.S. residents are running mayoral campaigns against candidates from the Institutional Revolutionary Party (known by its Spanish acronym of PRI), which has held near-absolute power here for seven decades.
Juan Duran, 50, who owns a car repair shop in Oxnard, is running for mayor of Tepetongo, a town of 10,000 about 25 miles away.
Martin Carvajal, 45, a factory manager who moved from Los Angeles to Fort Worth two years ago, is running for mayor of Apulco, population 5,000.
The men are driven by a mix of altruism and ego.
Like many migrants, they want to return to Mexico to show that they achieved wealth and success in the U.S.
But they also want to further development in towns that lack sewers and paved roads.
If they win, they will have to give up many comforts they have come to expect as U.S. residents.
The candidates' wives wonder how they will fare leaving their friends and homes to live in small Mexican towns where social circles are often closed to newcomers.
But the candidates and their supporters hope that their examples will encourage other migrants to return as part of a new breed of binational politicians.
Juan Hernandez, advisor to Mexican President Vicente Fox on Mexicans abroad, said the Mexican government supports the three migrants' activism, even though none are from Fox's center right National Action Party (PAN).
He and others believe that these municipal elections could usher in other candidates from the United States for state and federal legislative posts.
"These individuals come from immigrant-sending regions.
They understand the issues in their communities.
It tells us that Mexicans abroad are becoming successful.
They are also becoming more and more politically active," Hernandez said.
Fox, the first non-PRI president in 70 years, made migrants the hallmark of his campaign and courted them in trips to the U.S.
"We have political power now, and this is just the beginning," said Santa Ana resident Lupe Gomez, president of the Zacatecas Civic Front, one of several clubs founded by immigrants to California.
Some of the clubs have raised millions for public works projects in Zacatecas and were the breeding grounds for the Mexican campaigns.
The U.S. is now home to about half of the 1.2 million natives of Zacatecas, a state where "yup" and si are as easily exchanged as pesos and dollars.
Men wear Dodger caps as often as cowboy hats.
In these towns--separated by miles of mountains, farm fields and swaths of arid, desolate terrain--many houses stand abandoned by the families who have moved to "El Norte."
Talk of illegal border crossings raises no more eyebrows than a chat about the weather.
Still, some feel uncomfortable with the candidates and fear encroaching U.S. influence.
In a column about the Bermudez campaign in the local newspaper, El Sol de Zacatecas, J.E. Rivera wrote that many "believe that a great deal of our problems (family disintegration, AIDS, drug addiction, body piercing and tattoos) are related to North American influence."
Indeed, American culture is apparent on the campaign trail.
Campaign staff shrug when Bermudez asks for "el schedule."
He spouts English expletives when a staffer suggests that he paint his $40,000 pickup with campaign slogans.
He speaks longingly of HBO and thousand island dressing.
Duran looks as much a tourist as a candidate as he videotapes trips through the poor neighborhoods, many without running water.
Carvajal, deported 13 times under various aliases before becoming a U.S. resident in the 1980s, says he will need to return to Fort Worth to pay off campaign debt if he loses.
In all three cases, foes have challenged the men's loyalty to Mexico--how long they lived there and whether they intend to stay.
Raul Rodriguez Santoyo, president of the PRI in Zacatecas state, says none of the American candidates meet residency requirements.
Bermudez won the nomination of the leftist Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD) only after a monthlong battle to get the local government to certify that he had lived in Jerez for the required one continuous year--effectively pushing the truth, because he had been on his farm near Winters, Calif., for extended periods during that time.
Bermudez, Duran and Carvajal "may want to help, but there are other ways to do it," said Rodriguez.
"The political race satisfies the ego but not the law."
If there is a godfather of the mayoral candidates, it is Zacatecas Gov. Ricardo Monreal.
Monreal, who campaigned in California and visits the state twice a year, suggested the idea of the mayoral bids to the three men late last year.
He said they showed leadership, had money in the bank and a had a track record with voters because of their activity in civic clubs in California.
"They have learned about business, about technology, about farming, but . . .
they are the same Zacatecans we are, and they can help," said Monreal, a member of the PRD who makes no secret that he aspires to be Mexico's president.
For Carvajal, that learning process began as he moved between Zacatecas and California for nearly a decade.
He and his family finally settled in Los Angeles.
He became a legal U.S. resident and opened a furniture factory.
Until five years ago, when he sold the firm, he employed 70 people.
When one of his sons got too close to gang activity, he moved to Fort Worth, where he now manages a furniture factory.
Wife Olivia works on the assembly line.
Son Jose was the first in the family to graduate from college and is looking for work to use his engineering degree.
Daughter Maria is studying computers at the University of Texas, Arlington.
The youngest, Jesus, is 13.
"I feel like we got the American dream.
Now we want the Mexican one too," he said.
Seeking office in the remote village of Apulco as the candidate of a new centrist party--
Democratic Convergence--he is considered to have a good chance of winning.
Carvajal helped found the Zacatecas club in Los Angeles in 1987 and has remained very active, often traveling to Mexico three or four times a year.
"I just kept thinking, one day I will be mayor. . . .
I want to rob technology from the United States and bring it here," he said.
Although Duran's chances of becoming a mayor seem dim, he keeps knocking on doors.
As a member of the center-left Work Party, he says he wants real change for a place that will always be home.
In the late 1960s, Duran's family left Zacatecas and he moved among Los Angeles, Oregon, Chicago and Mexicali, Mexico.
He picked lemons, strawberries, lettuce and cilantro.
He also worked as a bartender and sang in mariachi bands.
He became a U.S. citizen and now owns a two-bay auto garage, which his brother Bernabe is running in his absence.
When he returned to visit Zacatecas, "I would see my friends from long ago, still in the same problem as before.
I would drive on the roads, and it would ruin my car.
It made me want to do something to help my people," Duran said.
At the same time, he wonders if he can live without the comforts of California and whether his family can adapt.
Duran's wife is not even Mexican, and the couple's 11-year-old daughter, born in Oxnard, does not have a mastery of Spanish.
"I've been in the U.S. for all these years, but I can't get Mexico out of me," he said.
"You want to go back, and then you wonder how to leave everything you've worked for."
Of the three candidates, it is Bermudez who provides the ultimate rags-to-riches saga.
In 1973, he and his wife paid $550 to a "coyote"--a smuggler--to take them to California.
They rode inside the trunk of a car for 149 miles.
Bermudez received U.S. residency in 1982 and in the early 1990s became a U.S. citizen.
The family lived in farm labor camps until Bermudez gradually bought 600 acres near Winters, west of Sacramento, and another farm near Watsonville, Calif., in the early 1990s.
He estimates that his annual income is $300,000.
He bought fancy cars and built a large home with tile and pillars from Mexico.
He added a pool only because "rich people have pools in the United States."
He says he has swum in it once.
Family members play key roles in the farming operation, which employs 700 people, including 200 from Jerez.
It is no secret in Jerez that Bermudez can get as many as 300 temporary visas for Mexicans who want to work his fields.
That disgusts his opponents.
"People don't like the way he's tossing around money and the visas.
It smells," said Salvador Espinosa, one of his opponents who returned to Jerez 10 years ago after 30 years in Pasadena.
Bermudez is expected to win his election.
He is campaigning hard, from factories to stores to schools to public housing.
"The PRI has been saying it will do things for 72 years.
They inaugurate roads and never finish them. . . .
We need to begin with actions," he says as he drives away from a one-room kindergarten, where he promised parents he would install playground equipment whether he won or lost.
Teacher Mirna Salsero is stunned by his promise.
For years, she has asked for help because the school's unimproved land doesn't offer enough for the students.
One mother with a 16-year-old son asks Bermudez to get him a farm worker visa because he's threatening to go with a coyote to Long Beach the next day.
Bermudez says he is too young to qualify for the visa.
"Why don't you have him stay?
We're going to make things better.
I promise," Bermudez says.
At lunch, however, he wonders if he can.
The campaign makes him consider whether he's from Mexico or the United States.
In Jerez, his black dress shirts and sunglasses contrast sharply with the locals' white tops and squinted eyes.
He feels out of place in Jerez, annoyed by slow restaurant service and inefficiency in other businesses and even his own campaign.
But he feels prejudice in the U.S.
Would he ever have even considered running for mayor in Winters?
He laughs at the question and says no one would vote for a Mexican immigrant with a heavy accent.
"I wonder if I'm doing the right thing.
I wonder if I can live here," he says on a campaign stop in Jerez. "
Now I can't turn back.
I made a promise to this election, and I will see what it brings me."
Probe:
Investigators focus on terrorists' ties to the city and prominent residents. 
Diverse and well-dispersed, Muslims here have moved deliberately through the years to cement their place in the community, not only with bricks and mortar but with involvement in civic affairs. 
Today, however, they are finding themselves, and their symbols of cultural and religious belonging, singled out for scrutiny as a result of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks a continent away. 
San Diego's Islamic community has became a focal point in the hunt for clues about the international conspiracy because key players operated seamlessly here possibly longer than anywhere else in the country. 
Three of the suspected terrorists found cover among San Diego's mosques and scattered Middle Eastern enclaves and may have lived here off and on for as long as two years. 
Moreover, two of the hijackers and as many as four others being detained as material witnesses in the probe all resided at various times at the home of one of the key symbols of Islamic integration in the city--Abdussattar Shaikh.
The retired college professor, who authorities have said is not a suspect, serves on the San Diego Citizens Review Board on Police Practices and co-founded the San Diego Islamic Center. 
For weeks, hundreds of FBI agents from San Diego, Los Angeles and other offices have crisscrossed the Islamic community, seeking to retrace the movements of hijackers Nawaf Alhazmi, Khalid Almihdhar and Hani Hanjour. 
During that time, at least five Middle Eastern men have been taken into custody as material witnesses--including one picked up by FBI agents in his apartment in La Mesa. 
The community also has become the target of random acts of rage.
The Islamic Center has been vandalized at least twice, first with paint balls and later with a cherry bomb. 
San Diego Councilwoman Donna Frye said the vandalism and heightened scrutiny have been difficult for many in the Muslim community because they are loyal Americans.
"These are good families," said Frye, whose district includes the Islamic Center. 
Leading Muslims have taken heart in such expressions of support.
Nonetheless, community leaders said they also are concerned about what they view as civil rights violations in the fast-moving investigation. 
"Many Muslims come to America with big hopes, they came here for freedom," said Imam Sharif M. Battikhi, president of the city's Islamic Services Foundation.
"But when you treat them like they are living in a police state, it reminds them of the countries they left for freedom in America." 
San Diego's Muslim community is relatively new but has grown fast. 
The first large wave from the Middle East began arriving from Iran in the early 1970s.
Like others who have moved to the state's second-largest city, they were attracted in part by the beaches, temperate climate and multiethnic mix of people. 
Today, as many as 100,000 Muslims are estimated to live in San Diego County.
They range from doctors and scientists from India and Saudi Arabia to recent arrivals from Yemen and Somalia who work in the service industry. 
The county boasts 14 mosques.
The biggest is the 27,000-square-foot whitewashed Islamic Center in the middle-class Clairemont neighborhood.
Smaller mosques are located in towns such as Lakeside and on gritty 50th Street in San Diego, an urban neighborhood where many recently arrived Somalian refugees live. 
A community that has sought to fit in, San Diego's Muslims are concerned that they are now sticking out and viewed by many with suspicion.
These perceptions have been heightened, community leaders said, as a result of FBI agents showing up at people's workplaces. 
FBI Special Agent in Charge Bill Gore, chief of the San Diego office, said his investigators face a difficult task balancing the concerns of the Muslim community with the need to move quickly to follow more than 3,000 leads. 
"My agents have been instructed to act with sensitivity," he said, "but we also have a job to do." 
Agents have visited mosques, homes and businesses across the county.
They also have pored over student records of the San Diego Community College District and interviewed instructors at a flight school where Alhazmi and Almihdhar took introductory lessons. 
As FBI agents fan out, they have been met with a mix of cooperation and confrontation. 
One of those who clashed with investigators was Chula Vista resident Ibrahim Nasser, 35, a native of Lebanon. 
He said agents visited his house several times when he was not there.
So he voluntarily met agents twice without a lawyer.
Nasser said he agreed to four polygraph tests and was accused of being a terrorist. 
The FBI's Gore counters that Nasser, who was not arrested, crossed the line. "
He made a remark insinuating he knew where the agent lived, which was taken as a threat and not well-received," Gore said. 
Among those most cooperative in the probe has been the man most publicly entangled--Shaikh.
The retired English educator invited FBI agents to his home and has since been interviewed for more than 15 hours. 
Shaikh rented a room at his two-story Lemon Grove residence to two of the alleged hijackers--Almihdhar and Alhazmi--in late 2000.
Both men are suspected of forming the nucleus of a San Diego cell that crashed American Airlines Flight 77 into the Pentagon. 
Since the attacks, Shaikh's home, in a rural community east of San Diego, has become a hub of investigative activity and news media stakeouts. 
Shaikh, born in India, has said he had no inkling of the hijackers' plans and had "nothing to hide."
He said his mission in life has been to help Middle Easterners and other members of the Islamic community to assimilate. 
For years, Shaikh's residence has been a home away from home for young Middle Eastern men.
Shaikh, whose shelves are filled with books and pamphlets on Islam, took a particular liking to Alhazmi.
Shaikh bought his boarder a leather jacket, which Alhazmi exchanged for one he liked better. 
Now that he knows what their plans were, Shaikh believes they made a mockery of the religion they claimed to follow. 
"These people have done everything that goes against Islam's teachings," Shaikh said.
"Islam values life and teaches that you cannot kill innocent persons or even commit suicide." 
Shaikh's supporters see him as a secondary victim of the hijackers. 
"He was giving to these men--much like the Christian sense of charity--who took advantage of his generosity," said Ron Lanoue, executive director of the San Diego chapter of the National Conference for Community and Justice, an ecumenical organization. 
Four of the material witnesses taken into custody in Southern California lived at Shaikh's house at various times in the past several years.
One, Omer Bakarbashat, allegedly provided financial assistance to Alhazmi and Almihdhar and showed them how to use a computer, federal investigators said. 
In a curious development last week, Shaikh and members of his family were added to an FBI list of people investigators want to prevent from leaving the country. 
Gore declined comment on why the family was on the list.
"We have been in contact with Dr. Shaikh, and at this time he is not a suspect," Gore said. 
Given that Alhazmi and Almihdhar blended in so easily, authorities are trying to determine whether additional conspirators may be operating in San Diego.
They also are investigating reports that other suspected hijackers were in the area before last month's attacks. 
For example, several witnesses have told the FBI they saw hijacker Mohamed Atta, who is suspected of traveling across the U.S. and overseas while coordinating preparations for the attacks, in San Diego last year. 
Mystery also surrounds the San Diego movements of hijacker Hanjour, who investigators believe piloted the airliner into the Pentagon. 
Earlier this year, a man believed to be
Hanjour showed up at the San Diego Zoo with a briefcase containing cash and documents in Arabic.
The case, apparently misplaced, was taken to the lost and found, according to officials at the zoo and FBI.
A document identifying the apparent owner was found inside and a zoo official used the public address system to reunite the owner with the case. 
A zoo security officer later told the FBI that she thought the man's name could have been Hani Hanjour.
She identified a photo of Hanjour, shown to her by the FBI, as the man who picked up the case. 
Was he meeting a courier? 
The search for answers appears far from over, meaning the investigation in San Diego and the spotlight on the city's Islamic community is not likely to let up soon.
It's a prospect that leaves community leaders with mixed emotions. 
"As Americans we want to get to the bottom of this and punish the guilty," said Omaran A. Abdeen, a professor of medicine at the UC San Diego medical school and spokesman for the Islamic Center.
" But when the dust settles, hopefully we can look back and address the violations of our civil liberties."    
Times staff writers Greg Krikorian, Matt Lait, Scott Glover and Robert J. Lopez and researcher Nona Yates contributed to this report.
   Judges and their staffs may not download sexually explicit material, music or videos on their office computers, under a policy announced Wednesday by the rule-making body of the U.S. court system.
The new policy "will help ensure that taxpayer-provided resources are devoted to" official business, not personal use, said U.S. District Judge Edward Nelson of Birmingham, Ala.
Judges are not "above the law" and do not have a right to use their computers for entirely personal uses, he added.
The new policy governs the 30,000 employees of the federal court system.
It had been sharply debated in recent weeks, and not just because of its effect on these employees.
The law is unclear on whether workers have any right to privacy in the use of their office computers.
But the federal court policy makes clear that privacy rights for all federal workers are minimal.
Judges, along with other federal employees, do not have a "right to use government-office equipment for nongovernment uses," the policy says.
In a second computer-related policy change, the judges said they want files in civil court cases to be put on the Internet
so they can be accessed by anyone, anywhere.
They said certain personal information, such as Social Security numbers or medical data, will be excluded.
If the paper files are now available to the public in a courthouse, they should also be available via computer on the Internet, the judges said.
Some district courts are currently making some civil court records available via a for-pay Web site.
Wednesday's decision will expand the program to all district courts.
For now, the new open-access policy covers only civil matters, not criminal cases.
The judges said they will consider later whether to put all criminal files on the Internet.
While the move to put civil cases on the Internet will affect more people, the judges were focused more intently on the dispute over their own computers.
In May, judges on the West Coast rebelled when they learned their computers were being monitored by the administrative office of the U.S. courts in Washington.
Judge Alex Kozinski of Pasadena, who sits on the U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals, said the surveillance was illegal, and he and his colleagues unplugged the monitoring system.
Court officials in Washington replied they are not interested in spying on individual workers or monitoring their e-mail.
Rather, they say, their concern was triggered by evidence that large files had been downloaded onto some courthouse computers from Internet sites that contain sexually explicit videos.
In response to Kozinski's protests, the rule-making body dropped part of the policy that says all court employees who use the court's computers "consent to monitoring."
But the rest of the policy detailing the "unauthorized or improper use" of court computers was adopted intact.
The policy change was to have been debated at the Supreme Court on Sept. 11, during the semiannual meeting of the U.S. Judicial Conference.
The conference consists of 27 top judges representing the federal circuit courts.
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist was there to chair the meeting.
But the discussion had just begun about 10 a.m. when word came that jetliners had struck the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
Rehnquist called off the meeting and the judges left the building.
Judges said this week it was the first time in 79 years that a meeting of the Judicial Conference was canceled.
Instead, the judges voted by mail on the new policy.
The two 9th Circuit judges who led the protest said they were satisfied with the compromise.
"We don't have a problem with saying that extensive downloading is inappropriate," said Chief Judge Mary M. Schroeder in Phoenix.
"I voted in favor of it."
Kozinski said he continues to believe that it is illegal to monitor employees without their consent.
"We had a problem with the monitoring part of this, and they withdrew what we found most objectionable." 
The Mac may be only a sliver of the personal computer pie, but there's a banquet of online information sources for Mac users.
The Web is full of Mac-related Web sites of all types and credibility levels, sites that have full-time editorial staffs and sites that are based in spare bedrooms.
Here are some of my favorites.
For daily news and analysis that reflect the pulse of the Mac community, there's no place like Ric Ford's Macintouch, at www.macin touch.com.
Online since 1994, Macintouch provides concise coverage of new products and software updates as well as reader-submitted opinions and tips.
Another fine news site is MacCentral, at www.maccentral.com, whose news is updated regularly during each business day.
MacCentral is published by the creators of Macworld magazine, which has its own site at www.macworld .com.
MacAddict magazine covers the Mac in an irreverent, unabashedly partisan style.
You can sample its attitude at its Web site, www .macaddict.com.
The granddaddy of Mac e-zines is Adam Engst's TidBits, which has been published weekly since 1990.
Distributed via e-mail and at www.tidbits.com, TidBits contains thorough reviews of Mac products and hard-hitting, well-reasoned analysis of news and trends in the Mac world.
For Mac troubleshooting advice, you can't beat Ted Landau's MacFixit (www.macfixit.com).
When a bug bites or a new operating system update causes problems with existing programs, you'll often hear about it here first.
One of the Mac's many strengths is its longevity.
Thanks to accelerator cards and other upgrades, I'm still using Macs made 10 years ago.
For tips on keeping an old Mac alive, check out Low End Mac (www.lowendmac.com).
The site is now running a series of articles on installing OS X on elderly Macs.
If you're a Mac geek exploring the Unix underpinnings of Mac OSX, you'll like MacSlash (www .macslash.org) and Mac OS X Hints (www.macosxhints.com).
Mike Breedens' XLR8yourmac .com is a solid source of advice on Mac performance tuning.
Apple zealots cringe at the thought, but many Macs share office space with Windows PCs.
John Rizzo's MacWindows (www.mac windows.com) provides news and advice on getting Macs and Windows on speaking terms.
Last week, the site published an article about the performance problems that users are reporting with Connectix's VirtualPC 5, which lets Mac OS X run Windows.
For news and links relating to Apple's QuickTime digital media technology, visit Robert and Judy Lettieri's Little QuickTime
Page(www.judyandrobert.com/quick time).
For professional video editors and DVD developers, 2-Pop (www.2-pop.com) provides articles and discussion boards on Apple's Final Cut Pro and DVD Studio Pro programs.
There's no shortage of free or nearly free software for the Mac.
Two good places to explore the world of freeware and shareware are MacDownload at www.mac download.com and VersionTracker (www.versiontracker.com).
Speaking of free stuff, if you're the type of Mac user who likes to customize your desktop and icons, you'll find decorating ideas at Icon Factory (www.iconfactory.com) and Xicons (www.xicons.com).
Out of the numerous Apple rumor sites, there is only one I'll recommend.
Crazy Apple Rumors (www.crazyapplerumors.com) is, in its words, "dedicated to the fabrication of Apple rumors that defy verifiability, grammatical convention or any basis in reality."
Believe it.
Last month, before the most recent Macworld Expo, the site broke this faux exclusive: "January 7th Keynote to Be a Repeat--Apple to Re-Introduce iPod."
And if you're a glutton for punishment, you'll find links to past Mac Focus columns as well as all of the articles I write for Macworld magazine at my humble Web outpost, www.jimheid.com.
Jim Heid is a contributing editor of Macworld magazine.
He can be reached at jim@jimheid.com.
Preparedness: A federal report on a simulated sarin gas release in O.C. cites several mistakes that could have spread the deadly chemical.
But agencies also win praise for their rapid response. 
A large law enforcement drill simulating a sarin gas attack at Edison Field in Anaheim last year exposed weaknesses in Orange County's response to a major terrorist assault, according to a confidential report by the Department of Defense. 
Many of the agencies involved in the drill won praise for their efforts, but the report cited a number of mistakes that could have spread the deadly chemical. 
County officials said the exercise was designed to detect exactly such problems so they can be avoided in the event of a real-life attack.
Agencies, they said, have been working to improve their response plan since the drill, which was one of largest ever undertaken in the nation. 
Still, the findings offer the best glimpse yet at how local authorities would react if terrorists launched an attack using chemical or biological weapons, as well as what some of the problems might be. 
* The rescue effort was hampered by communication problems, with various agencies having trouble reaching one another on the county's new 800-megahertz radio system. 
* Several hospitals did a poor job treating "victims' " wounds and removing the nerve agent from patients. 
* A National Guard soldier testing whether firefighters were contaminated by the gas mistakenly set his testing equipment so it could not detect sarin. 
* Some firefighters wore contaminated gloves while changing air tanks, a mistake that observers said could have sent the nerve agent into the air tanks' lines. 
* A group of victims in one waiting area of the stadium grounds were sent to another section to be scrubbed clean.
But, in a crucial mistake, they were then sent back to the original waiting area, where they probably would have come into contact with the gas again. 
Despite such miscues, officials who took part in the drill described the exercise as a success.
Evaluators hired by the Department of Defense said firefighters and police officers responded rapidly to the crisis. 
Many of the mistakes, officials said, were the result of minor gaffes rather than fundamental flaws in the county's response plan. 
"It is better to make the mistakes on the drill ground . . .
than not do any kinds of preparations and make those mistakes in a real-life incident," said Huntington Beach Fire Chief Chuck Burney. 
How local authorities would respond to a real-life incident using chemical or biological weapons has become a mounting concern nationwide since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. 
Although terrorism experts said the chances of such an attack remain slim, anxieties have grown since federal authorities last month grounded crop-dusting planes out of fear that the aircraft might be used in just such an attack. 
The Anaheim stadium drill drew more than 1,000 people from 50 local and federal agencies, helped by scores of volunteers playing the role of victims.
The simulation was one of many organized by federal officials to prepare cities, including Santa Ana, Van Nuys and San Diego, for terrorist attacks. 
The exercise was designed to be difficult, said Anaheim Police Lt.
Ray Welch, who helped coordinate the drill. 
The unfolding scenario pretended that terrorists at a baseball game unleashed the same deadly nerve agent that killed 12 people and sickened thousands in a 1995 attack on a Tokyo subway.
It included a number of obstacles to test rescue workers, including secondary explosive devices, winds that would allow the gas to drift and victims reluctant to cooperate. 
"We plan for the worst and pray for the best, so that whatever happens we can deal with it," Welch said.
"If you have a training exercise that's 100% perfect, how can you learn from it?" 
The report evaluating the drill singled out police officers for doing "an excellent job" in avoiding the gas while steering victims toward treatment areas.
Firefighters were praised for rapidly setting up equipment to scrub victims free of nerve agents.
And the report concluded that the Sheriff's Department bomb squad ably dealt with two explosive devices designed to kill emergency crews rushing to the scene. 
But the report also noted several communication problems among rescuers, including a delay in telling some emergency workers about what type of chemical weapon they were dealing with. 
As part of the drill, organizers arranged for one man to play the role of a suspect in the attack.
FBI agents stopped and questioned the suspect but then let him go.
It was only when Anaheim police stopped and questioned him later that he was detained. 
In the report, officials expressed concern over the ability of the county's ambulance crews to keep rescue vehicles from being contaminated by the deadly chemical, recommending that the crews receive more training. 
Welch said city officials began drawing up new training plans for rescue workers within hours of the drill's conclusion. 
Many of the mistakes were avoided during a similar exercise in May in Huntington Beach.
Although the emergency radio system that failed in Anaheim has been the subject of widespread complaints, the network worked properly during the Huntington Beach exercise, fire officials said. 
Officials said that more work needs to be done before Orange County is fully prepared to deal with a real-life attack. 
The drill showed that some hospitals had trouble treating casualties.
And county medical officials acknowledged that only a handful of hospitals are equipped with gear that can protect the medical staff and decontaminate patients.
In addition, more supplies of antidotes to chemical and biological agents are needed. 
"Hospitals are probably one of our biggest weaknesses," said Santa Ana Fire Chief Marc Martin.
"We've got some more work to do."
Global Crossing Ltd. said Monday it will launch an independent review of allegations of improper accounting methods made by one of its former financial executives. 
The beleaguered telecommunications firm also confirmed that the Securities and Exchange Commission is looking into the charges, and said it is cooperating with the regulator's requests for information. 
Global Crossing, which filed for bankruptcy protection Jan. 28, said the allegations made last August by Roy Olofson, vice president of finance at the time, are without merit. 
Olofson sent a letter to the firm's top lawyer in August, advising him that the company was inflating revenue and cash flow to enhance the appearance of results. 
Global Crossing's lawyers determined last summer that there was no substance to the charges, said Dan Coulter, a company spokesman.
But "recent happenings in the industry have brought a lot of attention to accounting," he said, without referring specifically to the accounting scandal that became the undoing of once-mighty energy trader Enron Corp. 
As a result, he said, Global Crossing disclosed the letter to its external auditor, Arthur Andersen, the day it filed for bankruptcy.
It revealed the allegations to its own audit committee for the first time the next day. 
Both Arthur Andersen and the audit committee then requested the creation of an independent review committee, which will retain independent counsel and an accounting firm other than Arthur Andersen, the company said. 
Global Crossing laid off Olofson in November as part of a widespread reduction in its work force.
In a statement Monday, Global Crossing said Olofson sought a multimillion-dollar settlement package and the motives behind his original letter are "questionable." 
Olofson's lawyer did not immediately return calls for comment.
But last week the lawyer, Paul Murphy, told The Associated Press that his client left Global Crossing last fall after the firm refused to change its accounting practices. 
Global Crossing spent billions of dollars over the last five years building a global fiber optics network linking 27 countries only to see bandwidth demand wither.
In what amounts to one of the largest bankruptcy cases in U.S. history, the Bermuda-based firm with executive offices in Beverly Hills listed $12.3 billion of debt and $22.4 billion of assets. 
Two Asian technology companies have offered to inject $750 million into the firm in a recovery effort that the company itself admits would allow creditors to recover some of their losses but would leave shareholders with nothing. 
A shareholder group representing about 300 investors is trying to build a legal case to have the bankruptcy filing dismissed -- a move some debt-rating analysts said is unusual but legally possible. 
Some members of the group are proposing a $1 billion warrant offering as an alternative.
Under a proposal outlined by David Mersereau, the vice president of Coburn Meredith, a small investment firm in Hartford, Conn., shareholders and bondholders would pay $1 a warrant for the right to buy one share at $2 for a five-year period. 
Mersereau said his firm bought about 300,000 Global Crossing shares after the company's chief executive, John Legere, said publicly in November that Global Crossing was fully financed for 2002 and would not file for bankruptcy. 
"It's just not a fair shake for the people on Main Street," he said.
"It's a public rip-off." 
A spokeswoman for Global Crossing said the company had no knowledge of Legere making such assurances.
* Individual stocks.
Some brokerages are refusing to take "market" orders in advance.
Market orders are requests to buy or sell a stock at whatever price is available.
Some firms, such as the major online brokerage Fidelity Investments of Boston, said they will accept advance "limit" orders--orders to buy or sell only at a specified price or better--although such trades cannot be executed until the market reopens, of course.
Fidelity rival Charles Schwab Corp. of San Francisco is among firms still accepting market orders, but it is encouraging investors to consider placing limit orders instead.
Limit orders can be less risky for investors during times of extreme price fluctuations because investors can specify the lowest price at which they would sell or the highest price at which they would buy.
* Mutual funds.
Unlike stock trades, which can be executed at the start of the day, most mutual fund transactions are completed at the end of daily trading.
That is, for most funds, orders to buy or sell are priced at the fund's closing price on the day the order is received (assuming the market is open).
For now, "Investors can think of this as if it were a Sunday: They can put in their orders but they won't go through" as long as markets remain closed, said John Collins, spokesman for the Investment Company Institute, the fund industry's Washington-based trade group.
The same pricing schedule applies to virtually all foreign stock funds traded in the U.S., Collins said.
Some funds, however, are priced more than once a day.
Some index funds from Rydex Funds , for example, are priced twice a day, and the Select stock-sector funds from Fidelity are priced hourly.
Some firms, including Schwab, have declined to take online fund trading requests for now, steering investors to phone representatives instead.
They say this is to provide investors thorough and timely information--not to dissuade them from selling.
Though trading could be fast and furious once it resumes, mutual fund companies say they stand ready to meet demand.
"Our Web site and automated phone system have the capacity to handle whatever happens," said Shelley Peterson, spokeswoman for Janus Capital Corp. in Denver.
Though Janus, like most fund companies, has reported light call volumes from customers so far, some analysts expect Wall Street's lengthy closure to lead to heavy trading volume when the stock market reopens.
* Investments in 401(k) retirement plans.
Fund companies that administer 401(k)s and similar tax-deferred retirement savings plans say their information systems are running smoothly.
Requests for mutual fund transactions within 401(k) plans, like other fund trades, will be executed at the end of the first day that trading resumes.
But investors should note that some employers sponsoring the plans have limits on the number of trades participants are allowed to make in a particular period, said Brian Mattes, spokesman for Vanguard Group in Valley Forge, Pa., which administers numerous retirement plans.
In some cases the limit may be four trades a year, and in other cases 10, he said.
That could hamper investors who were active traders earlier this year and now are bumping up against company-set limits.
Companies may set limits to keep plan costs in check, Mattes said, or they may simply be "paternalistic."
Reciting one of Vanguard's mantras, he said: "Excessive trading, after all, can be a road to ruin." 
Al Qaeda Promises More Attacks on U.S. Video: Defiant message from spokesman for Bin Laden's organization could backfire, some analysts say. 
Osama bin Laden's Al Qaeda organization pledged defiantly Tuesday that a "storm of airplanes" will continue to attack American targets until the United States ends its "crusade" against Afghanistan and Islam. 
In a menacing video message addressed to the entire Islamic world, Al Qaeda spokesman Sulaiman abu Ghaith also called on Muslims in more than 50 nations to "uphold their religion" by attacking American interests worldwide. 
"The Americans must know that the storm of airplanes will not stop and there are thousands of young people who look forward to death, like the Americans look forward to living," he said in the taped message aired on Al Jazeera, an Arab all-news television network, broadcast from Qatar. 
"America must know that the battle will not leave its land until America leaves our land, until it stops supporting Israel, until it stops the blockade against Iraq," Abu Ghaith said. 
It was the second video released by Al Qaeda since Sunday, when the U.S. began its military offensive against terrorism, dubbed Operation Enduring Freedom. 
Abu Ghaith warned that the new war against the United States will target all American facilities and personnel.
He said that Americans "must know" that the Islamic world will not allow its brethren to come under attack. 
"The jihad today is a duty of every Muslim. . . .
God says fight. . . .
The American interests are everywhere, all over the world.
Every Muslim has to play his real and true role to uphold his religion.
And fighting and jihad are a duty," he said. 
The Al Qaeda spokesman praised the men who crashed their hijacked jetliners into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon for doing "a good deed" by moving the battle onto American soil. 
For all the bravado, Abu Ghaith's message to the Muslim world also hinted at angry desperation.
The proclamation, which followed three days of air assaults on Afghanistan by American and British warplanes, complained about having to live "under this bombardment."
And Abu Ghaith said plaintively that Al Qaeda has a "fair and just case." 
In addition, given the international coalition against terrorism and the military might lined up against it, Al Qaeda's threats rang somewhat hollow, analysts said. 
In bellicose language, Abu Ghaith warned that Muslims will fight "unbelievers" with everything they have. 
"We shall be victorious.
The Americans have opened a door that will never be closed," he pledged. 
Neither the White House nor the State Department had any immediate comment on the Al Qaeda statement.
Indeed, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell did not see the first Bin Laden statement Sunday, State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said Tuesday. 
But some U.S. analysts predicted that the new threat could eventually backfire on the extremist movement, first by reinforcing the resolve of the international coalition confronting Al Qaeda and then by showing the group's inability to follow through on its warnings. 
Given the group's limited ability to counter American bombs, Al Qaeda's propaganda is merely psychological warfare, analysts said. 
"They're trying to unsettle the American public as well as the Western world.
Even if they don't have the capability, because they've demonstrated they've done it once, they want to make Americans think they can do it again and that Americans will always be vulnerable.
But it's not going to work," said Henri Barkey, a former State Department policy planning staff member who worked on Mideast terrorism issues and now heads Lehigh University's International Relations Department. 
Al Qaeda is "upping the ante" by making ever greater threats against U.S. interests, Barkey added. 
"If the attacks Al Qaeda calls for don't happen--and I don't believe they will--then the movement's credibility comes into question," Barkey said.
"The tables will be turned on Bin Laden, and he will be shown not to command that much of a following or be that much of a threat. 
"And that will be a psychological victory for us."
Leading graphics chip maker is the darling of users and Wall Street.
Among Silicon Valley nerds, chip engineers like Jen-Hsun Huang are the geekiest of all.
But when the 38-year-old founder of Nvidia Corp. strolls the streets in a T-shirt emblazoned with his company logo, he gets stopped for his autograph.
Granted, those asking are avid computer game players who shell out hundreds of dollars for each graphics card that contains one of Nvidia's high-end chips.
These days, though, it's not just consumers who are enamored of Huang and his company.
Wall Street also is swooning.
Despite a meltdown in technology stocks, Nvidia finished 2001 as the best performer in the Standard Poor's 500 index.
The chip maker replaced Enron Corp. in the index in late November.
"The company has just had extraordinary execution," said Mark Edelstone, analyst with Morgan Stanley Dean Witter in San Francisco.
Nvidia shares Friday fell $2.09 to close at $69.62 on Nasdaq.
This year, the question is whether Nvidia can sustain its performance in what is essentially a cutthroat commodity business in which prices plunge a few months after the introduction of new products.
The answer depends on how well the Santa Clara, Calif., company continues to crank out blazingly fast graphics chips ahead of its rivals, which include Intel Corp. and ATI Technologies Inc.
To survive in the semiconductor business, companies must stay on the bleeding edge of technology.
Being fastest and best is the only way to command premium prices.
To compete, companies must be large enough to spend hundreds of millions of dollars each year developing the latest technology.
In doing so, Nvidia, which designs new chips and contracts with Taiwanese manufacturers, emerged on top after a six-year wave of consolidation that reduced the ranks of graphics chip makers from more than 60 companies to little more than half a dozen.
Of those, Nvidia is the undisputed king, with a 60% share of the market for stand-alone graphics chips on personal computers.
"They're everybody's favorite semiconductor company," said Peter N. Glaskowski, senior analyst of Cahners
In-Stat/MDR in Sunnyvale, Calif., and senior editor of MicroDesign Resources, an industry newsletter.
"They have simply put in yet another year of consistent results by designing exactly what the market wants, delivering it when the market wants and charging a fair price," Glaskowski said.
It wasn't always that way.
Nvidia's first batch of chips in 1995 failed miserably, Glaskowski said.
But the company advanced, eventually setting the standard for speed and performance in 1997 with its Riva line of chips.
The following year, it posted its first profit--five years after Huang and two fellow engineers founded the company.
As computer games featured increasingly lifelike virtual worlds, consumers gobbled up PC graphics cards in record volume.
Nvidia pummeled rivals by putting out a new line of faster chips about every six months.
In 2000, Nvidia won a crucial bid to provide the graphics and audio chips for Microsoft Corp.'s Xbox game console, which launched in November and immediately became the must-have tech toy of the year.
The contract, estimated to bring in about $2 billion in revenue over five years, came with a $200-million prepayment from Microsoft.
The only blemish on the company's record has been a federal investigation of possible insider trading.
The Securities Exchange Commission in November charged 15 people, including 10 Nvidia engineers, of illegally trading shares of the company in 2000 after Huang circulated an internal memo about winning the Xbox contract, five days before the deal was publicly announced.
One engineer left the company, and Nvidia placed the other nine on unpaid leave pending the outcome of the investigation.
Meanwhile, Nvidia is expanding into markets for graphics chips in laptops, workstations and consumer electronics.
In addition, the company is vying for a larger piece of the market for graphics functions on a computer's main chip, an area dominated by Intel.
For Nvidia to continue to please investors, success in these new markets is key.
Nvidia's core market--personal computers--is losing steam as consumers have been slower to upgrade their PCs.
The Xbox contract is one such vital area.
Though not as profitable as its PC business, the Xbox deal gives Nvidia enormous cachet in future endeavors in consumer electronics, analysts said.
"You can only gain so much market share in one product before you begin to saturate the market," said Hans Mosesmann, managing director of semiconductor research at Prudential Securities in Menlo Park, Calif.
"The challenge for them is to penetrate new markets as successfully as they have done with the desktop market." 
If you want other stories on this topic, search the Archives at latimes.com/archives .
For information about reprinting this article, go to www.lats.com/rights .
   Libyan judges put off a verdict in the case of seven foreigners accused of injecting 393 children with the AIDS virus, saying Saturday that they needed more time to study defense arguments.
The six Bulgarians and one Palestinian -- all doctors and nurses  face the death penalty if convicted of murder and conspiracy.
They are accused of injecting the children with HIV-contaminated blood, but it was unclear if all those allegedly infected have died.
"The court decided to continue studying the rebuttals presented by the defense lawyers due to the size and importance of the case," the head of the three-judge panel said, according to Othman el-Bezanti, the lawyer defending the Bulgarians.
A verdict is expected at the next hearing, set for Dec. 22, el-Bezanti told the Associated Press by telephone from Libya's capital, Tripoli.
The delay "shows that there is no firm evidence about the guilt of our citizens," said Elene Poptodorova, spokeswoman for the Bulgarian Foreign Ministry in Sofia.
"The postponement gives hope that the time until Dec. 22 will be used to review all the facts," Poptodorova said.
Held since February 1999, the defendants have pleaded innocent.
Some have complained that their interrogators forced false confessions from them using torture.
The high-profile case has prompted protests from human rights groups, with Amnesty International saying "there have been serious irregularities in ... pretrial proceedings."
Bulgaria has accused Libya of holding a political trial against its nationals and has repeatedly called for an independent team of international experts to study the case and testify.
The court has refused to allow expert opinion from Switzerland and France.
El-Bezanti said that in explaining the reasons to postpone the verdict, the judges said "the court is keen on making sure defendants get all the guarantees Libyan laws ensure.
"
Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi has claimed that the CIA or the Mossad, Israel's intelligence agency, were ultimately behind the children's' illnesses.
Critics charge that Libya could be trying to divert attention from horrendous medical conditions at some of its state-run hospitals where, they say, disposable instruments are repeatedly reused and basic rules of hygiene are not observed.
Libya could also be trying to make Bulgaria forgive it its debts, estimated at $300 million, some say.
The case of the allegedly infected children was first brought to light in 1998 by the Libyan magazine La in the coastal city of Benghazi, where the Al-Fateh children's hospital is located.
The government closed La a few weeks after the reports were published.
Besides the murder and conspiracy counts, the Bulgarians are charged with drinking in public -- alcohol is banned in Libya -- and engaging in extramarital sex.
Nine Libyans charged in the same case are out on bail. 
Diplomacy: Deposed monarch tells 11 U.S. lawmakers that he would welcome foreign military help to oust the Taliban.
Afghanistan's former king, who is trying to assemble a broad coalition of Afghans against the Taliban regime, told visiting U.S. lawmakers Sunday that he would welcome foreign military intervention to help his group take power. 
Mohammed Zahir Shah won effusive backing for his effort from the 11 members of Congress, some of whom also promised U.S. aid to rebuild Afghanistan if opposition forces overthrow the Taliban and rid the country of terrorists. 
"The king's plan is a well-thought-out one," Rep. Curt Weldon, the Pennsylvania Republican heading the bipartisan group, told reporters after the private meeting. "
And from what we are hearing, he is perhaps the only person who can bring the Afghan people together.
We will assist that effort in any way that we can." 
Zahir Shah, who introduced a constitutional monarchy during his 40-year reign, has lived in Italy since his 1973 ouster opened the way for decades of conflict in Afghanistan.
Now 86, he has emerged as a popular figurehead since Sept. 11, when terror attacks on the United States brought the threat of U.S. retaliation against the Taliban.
Washington has named Saudi militant Osama bin Laden, who has been given sanctuary by the Taliban, as the prime suspect in the attacks. 
Envoys from the United States, Britain, Japan, the European Parliament and the United Nations have called on Zahir Shah to discuss the future of his homeland. 
The former monarch has urged the convening of a loya jirga, a grand assembly of elders, to unite the country's tribes behind a provisional government that would replace the Taliban and rid the country of Bin Laden's terrorist network.
The government would run Afghanistan for two years and then hold democratic elections. 
On Sunday, Zahir Shah met jointly with the U.S. delegation and members of the main anti-Taliban armed movement, the Northern Alliance, under tight security at his villa in Olgiata, a gated suburb north of Rome. 
"We have a common struggle against terrorism," he said as he greeted them. 
His talks with the Northern Alliance continued after the U.S. lawmakers left.
The alliance could lend crucial authority to Zahir Shah's proposed assembly, but it has not yet agreed to take part.
Its militias control about 5% of Afghanistan's territory, and some of its leaders are said to be jealous of the ex-king's rising profile. 
The head of the Northern Alliance delegation, Younis Qanooni, said he was "optimistic that something good will come out" of the meeting, "but we are still talking about details." 
Weldon said both the former king and the Northern Alliance are courting foreign military intervention.
Zahir Shah, he said, prefers a force led by the United Nations but "left the door open that, if the U.N. could not agree, that a U.S.-led force of allies would liberate his country." 
The congressman said he would pass on the Afghans' ideas to the Bush administration. 
Rep. Dana Rohrabacher (R-Huntington Beach) went further, promising that the United States would remain engaged in Afghanistan if the Taliban is unseated.
He said Washington did not do enough to help Afghans after Soviet forces, battered by the U.S.-financed moujahedeen, withdrew from the war-ravaged country in 1989. 
"We left them to sleep in their own rubble," he said.
"We left them to suffer, and what emerged?
The Taliban emerged.
What emerged after that?
Bin Laden." 
In Afghanistan, the reemergence of the long-ignored and reclusive former king has not gone unnoticed.
Taliban authorities arrested six people Sunday for distributing pamphlets calling for his return, the Pakistan-based Afghan Islamic Press reported. 
Taliban leader Mullah Mohammed Omar warned Zahir Shah on Sunday not to meddle in Afghanistan's affairs. "
Forget Afghanistan.
You won't be able to solve the issue of Afghanistan in your lifetime," Omar said in a radio broadcast monitored by Reuters news agency.
"How dare you think you can return to Afghanistan backed by the United States?"
Safety:
Soldiers armed with loaded M-16s will boost security, starting today.
The rifles will be fired as a last resort, a spokesman says.
National Guard troops with M-16 assault rifles are to report for guard duty at Los Angeles International and San Francisco airports today, in a move Gov. Gray Davis called "a symbol of the changes that have occurred at airports to enhance passenger safety." 
But experts warn--and Guard officials acknowledge--that the show of force against terrorism must be executed with great care to avoid harming those it is meant to protect. 
John Reppert, a retired Army general who is a research center director at Harvard University's Kennedy School of Government, said the presence of the National Guard may be most important as a symbol. 
"Frankly, in my opinion, the reason they are there is to restore confidence to the public," Reppert said.
Carrying M-16s, for instance, is useful for intimidating wrong-doers and reassuring skittish travelers, he said.
But actually firing a high-powered combat rifle in an airport terminal could do more harm than good. 
"I would not want soldiers to use an M-16 in a public place," Reppert said.
"Opening fire in an airport terminal is dramatically different from doing so in a village." 
The harder bullet used by the assault rifle is more likely to ricochet than a round fired from a pistol, Reppert said, which could harm bystanders. 
It might even be wise to keep the M-16s unloaded, Reppert said.
"As a commander, I would be very nervous about a soldier carrying a loaded gun.
For one thing, he might drop it.
" It is also "unlikely people are going to come in and try to shoot their way to an airplane," he said. 
It is common for soldiers on guard duty to keep their guns unloaded, with ammunition ready in a pouch.
The sentries guarding the USS Cole when it was bombed in October 2000 told the Washington Post they did not have ammunition in their guns, and did not think it made a difference in the surprise attack. 
But Maj.
General Paul D. Monroe Jr., the top officer of the California National Guard, said the M-16s carried at LAX will be loaded.
To fire the weapon, the soldier must charge it by pulling a handle and then release the safety mechanism, a process that takes about two seconds, Monroe said. 
Maj.
Stanley Zezotarski, a California National Guard spokesman, noted, however, that Guard troops would fire their weapons only as a last resort, and would typically let armed airport police officers take the lead in situations where shots might be fired.
Guard troops today use their weapons sparingly, he said, pointing out that 22 shots were fired by the National Guard during the 1992 Los Angeles riots, though more than 20,000 were fired by the Guard in the 1965 Watts riots. 
Monroe acknowledged that it would be preferable to have the Guard's police units at the airports, but they have been activated and sent out of state. "
Normally, our first choice would be to use our law enforcement units armed with side arms," he said. 
Monroe said, however, that most Guard troops get 16 hours a year of training in how best to assist civilian law enforcement. 
Such training, Reppert said, is crucial in preventing misunderstandings between the military and the police officers they work with as well as civilians.
Police also need to give specific instructions to soldiers, who may not be familiar with their protocol. 
"If you're on a base in Iraq and you throw someone to the ground, the odds of an Iraqi filing a liability suit against you are zero.
That's not true at LAX," Reppert said. 
"If a military person is told to search someone, there are no rules about sexual contact or touching in an inappropriate manner.
There are a lot more steps to follow in an airport, which paying passengers with legal rights expect, than infantry troops are trained to do," he said. 
Gen. Monroe emphasized that the California Guard has experience working with civilian police during deployments such as the 1992 riots.
Guard personnel know "we are there to support civilian authorities.
We work for them," Monroe said. 
Los Angeles and San Francisco are the first airports to deploy Guard troops.
About 700 will be patrolling all 30 of California's airports by mid-October. 
On Thursday, Gov. Davis reminded National Guard troops at the armory in Manhattan Beach of the importance of their presence. 
"This is a very important assignment . . .
your presence at California airports will restore confidence in the traveling public, and we need to get on with our lives," he said.
Security:
Governor wants to determine if the plane offered by a campaign contributor is the best deal available, and if a private aircraft is necessary at all.
Gov. Gray Davis' administration is reconsidering plans to lease a $9-million personal jet to fly him around, California Highway Patrol Commissioner D.O. "Spike" Helmick said Monday.
Helmick, who is charged with protecting the governor and legislators, said he suggested immediately after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks that Davis acquire a two-engine plane to bolster security.
State officials moved quickly to find a suitable aircraft and were expected to sign a lease contract this week.
Helmick said the Davis administration now wants to take time to consider whether the Cessna Excel airplane in question is the best deal available--and whether a private plane is needed at all.
"Everything has been put on hold," Helmick said.
"I think it's being reevaluated.
The governor and his staff have asked for it to be reevaluated."
Though 41 states use private aircraft to zip their governors around, gubernatorial airplanes have long been a controversial issue in California--and the deal the Davis administration was weighing was bound to continue the tradition.
The $80,000-a-month contract, which included a discount on fuel and free hangar space, was not the result of formal competitive bidding.
Instead, it was offered by a firm owned by Stephen Beneto, a trucking company executive who is one of the governor's largest campaign contributors.
The CHP settled on the deal with Beneto Jet Sales after contacting five airplane companies and outlining the expected security and performance standards.
Helmick said Monday the Davis administration may now want to seek offers from a broader set of companies if it decides to lease a plane.
The governor's office declined to discuss the issue Monday, referring all calls to Helmick.
But one state source, who requested anonymity, said administration officials were concerned that the timing of the plane contract made it appear that the governor was trying to capitalize on the terrorist attacks to get something he wanted.
There also is concern about the message Davis would be sending to the public by abandoning commercial flights in favor of private transport.
Former President Bill Clinton said last weekend that he planned to book several commercial flights in coming weeks as a show of support for the nation's airlines, which are in financial straits since the terrorist strikes.
Past California governors have enjoyed personal air transportation.
Gov. Pat Brown was fond of his Convair 340 propeller plane, which he nicknamed the Grizzly.
Ronald Reagan, who succeeded Brown as governor in 1967, avoided the personal plane for a while but eventually acquired a small jet.
Gov. Jerry Brown then refused to extend the Reagan lease and did away with planes altogether 25 years ago, saying they were too extravagant for his "era of limits" administration.
As a result, Davis' decision to consider bringing back the personal plane could become political fodder for his Republican opponents as he seeks reelection next year.
"Given the fact that Gray Davis has taken us from extraordinary surpluses to massive budget deficits, we think it is not the time to talk about a personal airplane for him," said Beth Miller, a spokeswoman for gubernatorial candidate and Secretary of State Bill Jones.
With families everywhere having to tighten their budgets because of the economic downturn, Davis should do the same, Miller said.
Jones, a licensed pilot, sometimes flies a small Cessna to events around the state but usually flies Southwest or United.
But other potential rivals were not so eager to criticize the idea.
Investment banker Bill Simon Jr. has been using commercial flights to get around the state but probably will use a personal plane as the campaign heats up, his advisors said, and he supports Davis doing the same as part of his office duties.
"We have no problem with the governor having a plane to conduct official business," said Simon spokesman Bob Taylor.
"These are difficult times we are living in.
It's entirely appropriate."
And former Los Angeles Mayor Richard Riordan, the other GOP hopeful, is not going to second-guess Davis' choice of transport, said spokeswoman Carolina Guevara.
But while Riordan has been known to fly private jets on occasion, he prefers to travel with the public and on the cheap.
"He likes to fly coach.
Unfortunately, I can attest to this," Guevara said.
"He loves to be in coach because he gets a chance to talk to people.
He doesn't see the need to fly any other way."
Bioterrorism:
It's trial and errors as government agencies take on a brave new world--and the media spotlight.
With anthrax exposures and infections mounting, the powers of public health face a new and daunting test--and the weaknesses of the system have come under a glaring light. 
The system's defects, brought on by years of budget cuts, are on display: Labs are easily overwhelmed, and strapped health departments are hurriedly diverting resources from chronic diseases and more routine infections. 
A quarter of public health agencies don't even have a plan to deal with disaster; 15 states lack state epidemiologists, detectives who study the cause and spread of diseases. 
The newness of the anthrax threat has forced public health authorities to rely on trial and error to respond.
Critics say two postal workers died this week because health authorities made the mistake of screening too few people for the deadly disease. 
Public health experts say the criticism is unfair. 
"We haven't dealt with anything like this before," said Dr. Allan Rosenfield, dean of the Mailman School of Public Health at Columbia University in New York.
"You do learn on these things as you go along." 
At the same time, public health workers are being forced to adapt to an entirely new culture.
Used to toiling in relative obscurity, they are suddenly working side by side with law enforcement in a high-profile, high-pressure investigation.
Their enemy is not the usual accidental outbreak but a tiny deadly bacterium, deliberately delivered. 
"Most of the things we deal with don't assume sinister motives," said Dr. Jonathan Fielding, Los Angeles County's top public health officer.
"Basically, bioterrorism is a new chapter." 
One example of the cultural mismatch between disease experts and federal agents:
Public health officials like to disseminate information as quickly as possible to alert the public to risks. 
But in the anthrax investigation, law enforcement officials have been slow to share information with public health authorities or have deemed it confidential.
So it was that health agencies were among the last to learn that the anthrax found in the office of Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle (D-S.D.) was weapon-grade. 
"The FBI has its particular concerns with developing material for a criminal prosecution, and they're not obviously terribly happy about revealing everything they've found," said Dr. D.A. Henderson, head of the bioterrorism advisory committee at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
"For us in public health, on the other hand, to get all the information out there is very key.
So there we are.
We're kind of stuck with two cultures." 
The breakdown in communication was the subject of a White House meeting Wednesday night with Director of Homeland Security Thomas J. Ridge.
"We've all got to rededicate ourselves to sharing information, and as quickly as possible," HHS Secretary Tommy G. Thompson said. 
Critics say public health officials have been too quick to make recommendations, only to amend or withdraw them later. 
Initially, for example, officials had warned the public against taking antibiotics unless they had been exposed to anthrax spores.
This week, however, federal health officials abruptly switched course and handed out pills to thousands of mail workers who may--or may not--have been near contaminated mail. 
At first, public health authorities did not believe anthrax could be contracted by touching an unopened envelope.
The deaths of two Washington, D.C., postal workers suggested that was wrong. 
And whereas vaccinating civilians against anthrax and smallpox was not considered a viable option at the outset, some health experts are beginning to discuss it more seriously. 
Public health officials say they are frustrated by criticism that they should have responded differently and more aggressively to the risks. 
"This kind of Monday morning quarterbacking isn't helpful," said Dr. Paul Wiesner, director of the DeKalb County Board of Health in Georgia.
"You never know about risk until you have data." 
Thompson agreed.
"We have good science, but it is also . . .
evolving science," he said at a summit of mayors this week. "
Remember, we have never had cases of anthrax attacks in this manner before.
It is a new challenge that we're all facing as a country." 
This is hardly the first time major health events have led to errors and oscillation by the health experts.
After the first cases of AIDS were identified in 1981, for example, the public health system floundered for years before consistent messages were sent. 
In the anthrax case, health officials are struggling to reassure a worried public at the same time that they are offering their own staff members crash courses on the disease, the officials point out.
The public is demanding answers to questions that the officials can't always answer. 
They also are forced to divert precious resources to false alarms, such as conducting lab tests on powder from doughnuts, crushed breath mints and talcum powder. 
In Nashville-Davidson County, Tenn., Health Director Stephanie Bailey had to retrain 17 public health nurses to interact with the public and journalists concerning anthrax.
That has funneled time and money away from immunizations and other services. 
Those everyday needs haven't stopped or slowed.
In the middle of dealing with anthrax anxiety, Nashville public health officials have responded to a hepatitis A outbreak and a possible case of whooping cough. 
Health workers nationwide are adjusting to very different jobs.
In the months before Sept. 11, biostatistician Erin Ray Pascaretti tracked the number of cardiac arrests in Dutchess County, N.Y., with the goal of improving survival rates and putting more defibrillators in public places.
Pascaretti is suddenly her county's full-time bioterrorism guru. 
"This is kind of exciting," compared to everyday biostatistics, she said.
"But there's also a sense of urgency that makes it somewhat overwhelming." 
One advantage to public health's new higher profile is that it may, over the long term, draw more government resources.
The White House already has proposed spending $1.5 billion to purchase antibiotics and vaccines and provide cash infusions to state and local health departments.
Several members of Congress have talked about providing even more money, especially for state and local agencies. 
"There is a political will to address the public health infrastructure and gaps, even in my city," said Bailey, whose department has absorbed budget cuts for 10 consecutive years. 
Said Dr. Michael Caldwell, health commissioner in Dutchess County: "My view of public health hasn't changed, but I believe the world's view of public health has changed.
This incident has crystallized it so we don't have to sell it anymore."
Race:
Flatter route gets good reviews, though no records are set.
One couple ties the knot.
The 17th Los Angeles Marathon featured a flatter course, a record number of competitors, a slew of patriotic displays and even a wedding ceremony near the 6-mile marker.
But the new course, which eliminated a grueling uphill climb through Hollywood, failed to produce the records that organizers envisioned.
More than 23,000 runners from all 50 states and more than 80 countries began the race downtown in the shadow of the future Disney Concert Hall, which will be home to the Los Angeles Philharmonic.
The day's athletic fete also included a 25-mile bike tour, a wheelchair race and a 5-kilometer run/walk.
Stephen Ndungu of Kenya won the 26.2-mile race, the first man to win the race in two consecutive years, with a time of 2:10:27 that easily beat other elite runners.
But Ndungu's time was nearly a minute off the record set by fellow Kenyan Simon Bor in 1999.
In the women's race the winner, Lyubov Denisova of Russia, recorded a time of 2:28:49, which was more than two minutes off the race record.
Denisova and Ndungu, who both beat their personal best performances, won $30,000 each and new Honda Accords.
Some runners said the advantages gained by the new course were erased by the higher temperatures, which topped 60 degrees at the 9:13 a.m. start and climbed past 70 as the event wore on.
"For marathoners, anything over 60 degrees is considered hot, but the course made a big difference," said Jim O'Brien, 49, track and cross country coach at Arcadia High School.
Others, such as Denisova, said they enjoyed the heat or were not affected by it.
Race officials credited the course design with lowering the number of people who became ill after crossing the finish line.
"The finishers look really strong," said Marie Patrick, executive vice president of the L.A. Marathon.
"In spite of the heat, it speaks a lot for the new course.
They're tired, but they're not in absolutely terrible shape.
People are looking to be in much better shape crossing the line than they've been in past years."
Runners Brian Gillespie, 48, and Maureen Kennedy, 50, took a 45-minute break from their run to get married.
The couple met four years ago at the L.A. Marathon at Mile Six, and they chose to get married Sunday at a rose garden near USC along the course.
They were joined at the ceremony by other marathon runners, and the group then finished the race together in just under six hours.
The ceremony "took a little while
and we were getting stiff, but it was worth it," Gillespie said.
Gillespie and Kennedy planned a Mexican food dinner Sunday and a honeymoon later in the year in Big Sur, where they plan to run a marathon.
Love, it seems, was in the air.
Kenny Spellman, a carpenter from Thousand Oaks, finished the marathon and then stood on the sidelines waiting for his girlfriend, Emily Kanney, to catch up.
He held up a placard saying, "Emily, finish the rest of your life with me."
"At the time, I was really dragging, but obviously that gave me a huge, huge boost," Kanney said.
Spellman then accompanied her across the finish line, holding his sign and a bouquet of roses.
Two other couples became engaged at the race, officials said.
Thousands of spectators and family members lined the marathon route, hoping to motivate friends and relatives.
Many hooted, whistled and screamed in hopes of drawing the attention of a runner, at least long enough for a quick picture.
Standing along Figueroa Street, spectator Phil Lamar of Simi Valley caught a sweatshirt hurled at him by his wife, Cynthia, running in her second marathon.
"She's worked her little heart out," he said.
"It's been a long, long dream."
The race's start was delayed by nearly 30 minutes because police discovered a suspicious package on Figueroa, near Pico, about 10 to 15 minutes before the scheduled start of the wheelchair race.
"We wanted to look at it well before competitors went by that site," said Police Chief Bernard C. Parks, explaining the delay.
More than 20 miles of the 26.2-mile course were new this year because of the redesign.
The course took runners to the farthest point west in its history, flirting with the border of Beverly Hills, before heading back to downtown for a finish on Hope Street north of Olympic Boulevard.
More than 300 of the participants, dubbed the Legacy Runners, had taken part in all 16 previous L.A. marathons. "
After the first one, they're all easier," said Michael Harris, 42, of Glendale.
Racers cited different motivations for running.
Four brothers said they ran in honor of their late brother, Bobby Gutierrez, 38, who died in 2000 from cancer.
Gutierrez died two months after he ran his last L.A. Marathon. "
He just loved to run marathons," brother George Gutierrez said.
"He was the guy to beat all the time."
While personal pride and dedication drove many runners, others were pushed along this year by a sense of patriotic duty.
In a post-Sept. 11 gesture, runners decked out in their red, white and blue, some waving giant flags or bearing smaller versions flying from baseball caps and strollers.
Five-year-old Jaryd Dorsey, clutching his father Earl's hand, walked the 19th mile in honor of his mother, Dora Menchaca, a 45-year-old Amgen Inc. researcher from Santa Monica who was killed in the Sept. 11 crash of Flight 77.
Menchaca had run in the marathon for the previous three years.
"She wanted to do it again," said Denise Menchaca, Dora's sister-in-law, who handed out Gatorade on the sidelines with her children.
"But she never got the chance.
"It just seems like that nostalgic feeling is in the air this year," Menchaca said.
"Everyone seems to be running for something or someone."
New York firefighter Dan Rowan completed the 25-mile bike course and then ran the marathon.
Rowan said he began to feel leg cramps after a bathroom break late in the marathon.
"I was motivated at that point by thinking about all of the guys we lost.
That got me through it."
But there were those simply there in the name of fun, like the three Elvis look-alikes pushing their way down Mile 20 along 6th and Fairfax.
Randy Thiele, 45, Jeff Padilla, 52, and Rob McNair, 47, all wore Elvis Presley garb, complete with large black pompadours, gold chains and white glittery jumpsuits.
They took turns pushing a stroller with a picture of the King on the front and a radio blaring his greatest hits inside.
"We're here for the slower runners, to keep up their motivation," said Thiele, well on his way toward finishing his 12th L.A. Marathon.
He's done it as Elvis every year.
Pharmaceuticals:
Analysts say investors should not assume the anthrax crisis will buoy such firms indefinitely.
The spate of anthrax infections and the fear of larger-scale biological weapons attacks have triggered a surge of interest in vaccine, drug and biodetection equipment makers.
Yet analysts warn that the stock gains linked to the current crisis may be short-lived.
Bayer , the German maker of Cipro--the antibiotic of choice for anthrax infections--is tripling its output of the drug.
And Bayer's stock price has risen by more than 33% since the anthrax outbreaks began.
But Bayer's longer-term prospects look troubling, analysts say.
Although Cipro produces more than $1 billion in annual sales, that's only a small fraction of Bayer's roughly $28 billion in total revenue.
And the U.S. government is pressuring Bayer to voluntarily relax its patent control over Cipro, which expires in 2004, so that other companies can supply the drug.
The government also could issue an order that would allow generic drug makers to produce a Cipro equivalent.
Bayer was forced in August to pull one of its top-selling drugs, the anti-cholesterol remedy Baycol, off many international markets after reports that dozens of Baycol users died or developed life-threatening symptoms.
Several smaller companies also have achieved sudden notoriety for work on bioterror countermeasures, yet commercial versions of many products still might need years of development.
One field of sudden interest centers on the definitive identification of a bioweapon.
At present, these tests can take days in an advanced laboratory, as diagnosis of the recent anthrax cases has shown.
And much of today's diagnostic equipment is costly and bulky--unsuited for emergency response at the site of an attack.
Two biotech companies, Sunnyvale, Calif.-based Cepheid Inc. and Nanogen Inc. in San Diego, say their products will transform bioweapon testing.
The devices attempt to identify samples of hazardous microorganisms by rapidly comparing each sample's unique genetic material, or DNA, with the DNA profiles of known pathogens, such as the organisms that cause anthrax or smallpox.
Scientists say these techniques are becoming highly reliable.
The two small companies, among others, are working to streamline the process to allow field technicians to determine within 30 minutes whether a bioweapons attack has occurred and, if so, what pathogenic agent was involved.
Nanogen's stock has jumped 73% since last month's terrorist attacks, partly on the strength of a $1.5-million U.S. Army grant to develop a portable kit using DNA comparison technology.
On Wednesday, Nanogen's stock closed up 19 cents at $8.19 in Nasdaq trading.
"Their technology theoretically could be applicable" to bioweapon detection, said Thomas Flaten, a biotech analyst with Dain Rauscher Wessels. "
But there is no product now," he said, cautioning investors against betting that the bioterror crisis will buoy such stocks indefinitely.
Last year, Nanogen lost $24 million from operations on sales of only $11 million.
Cepheid, whose shares have more than tripled in price since the terror attacks, sells a device called Smart Cycler that analyzes 16 biological samples at once.
The firm has sold about 400 units, including about 100 to biodefense agencies.
But Smart Cycler is designed for DNA analysis in biomedical research and cancer cell detection, not for field analysis.
The $27,000 device requires refined samples uncontaminated from dirt or blood.
Cepheid is developing a version of its product that it said will refine contaminated samples and still produce a result within 30 minutes.
A prototype of that device--about the size of a small suitcase--will be delivered to the Defense Department this year, said Kurt Peterson, the company's president.
A commercial version could be available by 2003.
"Only about 20% to 25% of our business is related to biothreat, although we have had a lot of Defense Department funding in the past," Peterson said.
The company sells mainly to biomedical researchers and food safety test labs.
In its last quarter, Cepheid lost $4 million on sales of $2 million.
But experts hope that initial government acceptance of rapid-detection technology could spur general market acceptance that could boost the detection equipment industry.
Pharmaceutical companies also have gotten a financial boost from the bioterror crisis, which has put a spotlight on possible medicines for biological weapons victims.
But the stock spike for such companies also may prove ephemeral, analysts say.
Gilead Sciences Inc., based in Foster City, Calif., saw its stock hit an all-time high last week on the strength of reports that its antiviral drug cidofovir, designed to treat AIDS-related infections, has shown promise in the lab as a possible treatment for smallpox.
Gilead Sciences is not in the biowarfare prevention business, said Joseph Dougherty, a biotech analysts at the Lehman Bros. investment bank.
He added that the distance between lab evidence and commercially viable treatments can be measured in years--if ever.
Because smallpox was eradicated decades ago, children are no longer given smallpox vaccines.
And adults who were vaccinated decades ago would need booster shots to ensure immunity.
So government officials fear that terrorists could unleash an attack using the deadly virus.
No U.S. company currently manufactures smallpox vaccine, and current stockpiles might be sufficient to vaccinate only 15 million people.
Shares in Avant Immunotherapeutics Inc., based in Needham, Mass., rose nearly 60% last week, after the company licensed its vaccine technology to DynPort Vaccine Co., a major Defense Department contractor.
"I don't think the stock bump will be sustainable" because the deal is relatively small, said Mark Monane, a physician and biotech analyst with investment bank Needham Co.
"If you buy Avant, don't buy it because of biowarfare."
Medical experts also hope that the bioweapons incidents will finally prompt the government to jump-start the vaccine industry, which has languished for years.
The only U.S. maker of anthrax vaccine is privately held BioPort Corp. in Lansing, Mich.
The company has suffered a series of manufacturing problems that has prevented it from fulfilling contracts to supply the Defense Department, let alone stockpile the vaccine for civilian use.
"The pharmaceutical industry has shown very little interest in vaccines," which can confer permanent immunity to a disease, said Steven Block, a Stanford University biophysicist and government advisor on biological warfare.
Drugs that treat disease symptoms offer more long-term profits, he said.
"They are in the health maintenance business, not in the business of curing people."
Diplomacy: 'Please remember the wariness' of Asia over Japanese militancy, Jiang says.
Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi came to China on Monday to allay fears over his country's military involvement in the war on terrorism and to assuage lasting Chinese anger over Tokyo's military aggression during World War II.
Koizumi spent just six hours in the Chinese capital meeting with President Jiang Zemin and Premier Zhu Rongji, whose government has cautioned Tokyo to be "prudent" in giving any military backing to the U.S.-led strike on Afghanistan.
Although Japan is likely to offer only rear-guard technical and logistical support, Beijing remains deeply mistrustful of a neighbor it still casts as a former aggressor unwilling to own up fully to its shameful wartime past.
But the Communist regime here also is eager to appear constructive in the United States' declared war on global terrorism.
A Japanese government official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said Koizumi's meetings with Jiang and Zhu were "very positive."
"We can say the tense phase of the bilateral relationship has been improved by today's meetings," the official quoted Jiang as saying at the conclusion of the talks.
The discussions focused on both the history and the imminent future of Japanese military action.
To support the U.S.-driven effort to root out Osama bin Laden, the man accused of masterminding the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, Tokyo is set to pass a law allowing Japanese troops to engage in the closest they have come to combat in half a century.
The plan would dispatch Japanese warships to offer medical and transport assistance to U.S. and allied troops mounting the battle in Central Asia, as well as humanitarian aid to refugees.
Despite the plan's limited scope, the Beijing regime remains leery of any expansion of Japan's military role and of the long-standing security ties between Japan and the U.S., which it sees as coming at the expense of its own preeminence in Asia.
Jiang told Koizumi that Japan's wish to help with the strike against terrorism is understandable but asked him to "please remember the wariness of Asian countries" about Japanese military action, the official said, adding that Koizumi reiterated the "very clear principle" that Japan not use force.
"This is because we learned from the past that Japanese military action victimized so many people," he said.
Even so, the Chinese government has long accused Japan of showing too little remorse for its brutal occupation of China, which cost millions of Chinese lives.
After Koizumi's August visit to a shrine honoring Japan's war dead, including officers from World War II, China's leaders rebuffed his overtures for a meeting for weeks.
They relented with Monday's quick-hit visit, Koizumi's first as prime minister.
The whirlwind tour began symbolically with a stop at the Marco Polo Bridge outside Beijing, where Japanese troops used a skirmish as an excuse for launching a full invasion in 1937.
Koizumi is only the second Japanese prime minister to visit the bridge.
Afterward, he repeated expressions of regret for the suffering his country inflicted on its giant neighbor.
Koizumi offered "his heartfelt apology and condolences" to those in China who fell victim to Japan's aggression.
But Koizumi's statement stopped short of the written apology China has demanded.
Congress: House measure includes it, Senate's does not.
Both aim to broaden law enforcement's powers.
The Senate and House are poised to pass separate anti-terrorism bills next week with differences on key provisions that could complicate the prospects for a final agreement.
Those differences came into clear view Thursday after Senate negotiators disclosed details of an agreement they reached during marathon talks the night before with the White House.
Both bills would dramatically expand law enforcement's surveillance powers, increase penalties for terrorist crimes and allow for longer detention of noncitizens suspected of terrorist activity.
But the two chambers differ on the scope of some of these new powers and on a number of provisions designed to guard against the erosion of civil liberties.
The main sticking point is a provision in the House bill that would cause law enforcement's new surveillance authority to expire after two years.
The clause was included to appease House members who fear the sweeping powers proposed for law enforcement would be vulnerable to abuse and ought to be reexamined in 2003.
The Senate, acceding to White House demands, did not include such a "sunset provision."
Rep. F. James Sensenbrenner Jr.
(R-Wis.), chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, said the discrepancy could be a major obstacle.
"That would cause great difficulties in the House because the sunset provision was the principal compromise that got the agreement," Sensenbrenner said.
Without that provision, he said, the bill could either fail in the House or pass by such a narrow margin that it would send an unfortunate signal about the nation's resolve.
"The question the administration is going to have to answer is what message we want to send to the world," Sensenbrenner said.
"If it looks like the air of bipartisanship is falling apart, that will be interpreted by the terrorists that maybe America is not as united in meeting this threat."
The provision exposes a rare rift between the House GOP's leadership and the administration, which has argued against a termination clause in legislation that Atty.
Gen. John Ashcroft says is critical to the country's ability to defend against terrorist attacks.
"No one can guarantee that terrorism will sunset in two years," Ashcroft said Thursday.
"Our laws need to reflect the new war. . . .
It must provide us with tools on a continuing basis to do so."
White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said President Bush shares Ashcroft's concern.
The sunset clause would apply to portions of the legislation that ease restrictions on electronic surveillance.
Among them are provisions that would allow law enforcement to eavesdrop on e-mail and other computer communications without permission from a court; to obtain wiretapping authority for multiple jurisdictions from a single court; and to deploy "roving" wiretaps that allow investigators to monitor a suspect's communications across multiple devices.
On several other fronts, the House and Senate bills are virtually identical, scaling back or scrapping entirely some of the most controversial proposals made by the White House after the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon.
Both bills would allow investigators to detain noncitizens suspected of terrorist activity for at most seven days before having to file charges or release the detainees.
Ashcroft had sought authority to hold such suspects indefinitely.
Both bills also would broaden law enforcement's power to pursue wiretap authority under guidelines for gathering foreign intelligence.
Ashcroft had sought sweeping clearance to conduct such wiretaps.
But lawmakers said authorities would need to show that seeking foreign intelligence is "a significant purpose" of the surveillance.
The Senate and House bills also set similar guidelines that allow law enforcement greater freedom to share information culled from wiretaps and other sources with intelligence agencies when terrorist threats are identified.
The Senate agreement was announced late Wednesday.
Majority Leader Tom Daschle (D-S.D.) indicated that he plans to push the bill through the Senate swiftly by bringing it directly to the floor next week, rather than waiting for it to be reviewed by the Judiciary Committee.
A lack of regulation allows firms to control production.
Some want to see the government step in. 
The shortage of vaccines in the United States against smallpox and anthrax is hardly isolated to those once-obscure bioterrorist threats.
This country suffers chronic difficulties in producing even some everyday inoculations. 
The process is plagued by shortages and manufacturing snafus.
Flu shots, for example, will be delayed again this year because one of the four manufacturers has stopped making the vaccine and another is experiencing plant delays. 
A months-long shortage of tetanus vaccine has forced hospitals and doctors to abandon standard 10-year booster shots for adults and even to deny shots to injured patients in some remote areas.
And demand for a new vaccine against such childhood maladies as meningitis has been so great that its manufacturer can't keep up. 
Several other vaccines are produced by only one manufacturer and could disappear with a serious plant malfunction, a failure to meet federal standards or a decision by the producer to withdraw from the market. 
The problem is that vaccine makers have little financial incentive to continue manufacturing because vaccines are relatively inexpensive.
And the companies face plenty of legal liability when patients allege injury.
From their perspective, plants could be better used to make blockbuster drugs. 
"Let's face it, there aren't the profits in vaccines that there are in the baldness drug minoxidil," said Steven Block, advisor to the government on biological warfare issues and a Stanford University biophysicist. 
Critics lament that the federal government has little control over the industry.
Legally, the government cannot require companies to manufacture vaccines, nor can federal officials demand that companies give notice if they want to stop making one. 
Dr. Steven Black, co-director of the Vaccine Study Center at Kaiser Permanente, said vaccine companies should be regulated in the same way as public utilities or banks. 
If the lone maker of tetanus vaccine "decided they could make more money selling rubber ducks tomorrow, they could theoretically stop doing that
and then there would be no one producing tetanus in this country," Black said.
"That doesn't seem appropriate to me." 
For now, doctors and patients confront some serious shortages. 
Rural physicians complain that they have no tetanus vaccines for patients who suffer deep cuts or who step on scraps of metal, said Dr. Bruce Gellin, executive director of the National Network for Immunization Information.
Pulmonologists, he said, have reported they couldn't get flu shots for some patients with weak immune systems. 
"It's not clear that people have been harmed yet by these delays, but the fact that there are spot shortages of these vaccines--and you have to prioritize who gets it--
that's a problem," Gellin said. 
With bioterrorism fears growing by the day, Health and Human Services Secretary Tommy Thompson negotiated a deal with a British company, Acambis, to produce 40 million doses of smallpox vaccine by next summer.
He's also negotiating with other drug companies to expand the government's stockpile to 300 million doses. 
The government had no backup supplies when Wyeth-Lederle Vaccines stopped making tetanus vaccine for adults earlier this year.
Because a second company also made the tetanus vaccine, the government did not deem it necessary to keep any reserves on hand. 
Aventis Pasteur, the remaining tetanus vaccine manufacture, will need several more months to increase its production. 
Government officials acknowledge now that tetanus supply problems could have been prevented. 
"We have to reevaluate," said Dr. Walter Orenstein, director of the National Immunization Program at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
Several other vaccines are likewise made by a single company.
Merck & Co. is the sole producer of measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine, as well as the chickenpox vaccine.
Wyeth-Lederle is the only manufacturer of pneumococcal vaccine for children. 
Neither of the two relatively new vaccines is kept in the government's stockpile. 
According to recent CDC figures, the government keeps only three routine vaccines in its stockpile: 4 million doses of MMR vaccine, 3.6 million doses of polio vaccine and 150,000 doses of pediatric diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus vaccine. 
Several members of Congress and the National Vaccine Advisory Committee are so concerned about the vaccine supply that they are discussing how the government can protect the public from shortages. 
"The government needs to play a bigger role in assuring vaccines by stockpiling them," said Rep. Henry Waxman (D-Los Angeles), who has been actively involved in vaccine supply issues.
But having a federal takeover of vaccine manufacturing "would have to be a last resort," he said. 
Orenstein suggested greater financial incentives be given to drug companies to produce vaccines.
Mass vaccination programs, such as those for childhood diseases, are normally developed under government or World Health Organization contracts that offer very modest profit margins. 
Pharmaceutical companies prefer to focus their efforts on vaccines for more specialized conditions, such as Alzheimer's disease, AIDS and cancer.
If such vaccines can be manufactured, they could be huge moneymakers. 
"Vaccines are not the gift that keeps on giving with respect to pharmaceutical company profits," said Block, the Stanford biophysicist.
"They are interested in selling us a pill that we can take every day for a long period of time." 
In the 1970s and early '80s, most companies left the vaccine business because of liability concerns, leaving most of the market to a few large competitors. 
"With any large-scale vaccination campaign, you know one thing for certain--people will die," Block said.
He was referring, primarily, to the elderly, the very young, or those with weakened immune systems.
But strong and healthy individuals, too, are sometimes harmed by vaccines. 
In response, the federal government established a compensation program for patients who suffer injury.
The program has paid out $1.3 billion since its inception in 1986, removing most liability from the vaccine companies. 
But many new vaccines are not covered in that program, and the program allows civil suits in certain circumstances. 
On top of legal concerns, experts say, some drug companies have been driven out of the vaccine business by more stringent safety standards imposed by the federal government. 
In 1999, the government banned the use of thimerosal, a vaccine preservative containing mercury that possibly has dangerous side effects.
As a result, two of four companies stopped producing childhood diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus vaccine.
A third company has had troubles upgrading its plant. 
Now there is a national shortage of that vital childhood vaccine. 
"We accept a trade-off that there may be glitches in the vaccine supply because now we no longer accept mercury of even the smallest amount as a preservative in vaccines," said Dr. Jerome Klein, a member of the National Vaccine Advisory Committee. 
BioPort Corp., which makes anthrax vaccine, hasn't produced a dose since 1998 because its plant has consistently failed U.S. Food and Drug Administration inspections.
It is trying yet again to receive permission to restart production. 
Even so, some say that the vaccine industry is undergoing a kind of renaissance--at least in the areas of genetic engineering that can lead to lucrative niche products. 
"We've made enormous strides.
The vaccine industry has really been transformed," said Una Ryan, chief executive of Avant Immunotherapeutics Inc. 
The company is creating oral vaccines for affluent travelers who want to be protected against cholera and typhoid when they travel to areas where such diseases are endemic.
Avant is also producing vaccines to improve cholesterol levels. 
Avant recently licensed technology pertaining to a genetically engineered anthrax vaccine to DynPort Vaccine Co., a supplier to the Defense Department.
The vaccine is still being developed. 
"In the areas we have concentrated in, we believe that they are very nice businesses," Ryan said. 
The government, meantime, is doing research of its own.
To deal with bioterrorism, the National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Disease is studying whether a diluted version of the smallpox vaccine would effectively protect individuals in the event that new supplies are not forthcoming. 
Smallpox, caused by a virus, is regarded as much more worrisome than anthrax as a biological weapon, since it is highly contagious, often deadly and has no effective treatment. 
If the research shows that a diluted version provides immunity, "we can expand the current 15.4 million doses to 75 million," said Dr. Anthony Fauci, the institute's director, who added, "We should have an answer by the end of the year.
" 
Some experts have suggested that the push for smallpox and anthrax vaccines have reawakened the public to the benefits of inoculations.
After all, decades have passed since massive outbreaks of smallpox or polio. 
"Until there's a crisis, people forget what the value of these things are in keeping diseases at bay," Dr. Gellin said.  
Times staff writer Marlene Cimons in Washington contributed to this report.
By Elliott Teaford
The Clippers are trying to avoid becoming impatient with the NBA over its handling of Lamar Odom's drug suspension.
Odom was suspended without pay for a minimum of five games Nov. 5 for violating the league's antidrug policy.
The team then put Odom on its suspended list Nov. 7.
He missed his sixth game Friday, when the Clippers lost to the Toronto Raptors.
Now, the team is starting to wonder when it might expect its best player to be reinstated.
Because the NBA's handling of drug suspensions is a confidential matter between the league and the player, the team is in the dark.
Odom also had heard nothing from the league, Coach Alvin Gentry said Saturday.
"Obviously, he's an integral part of our team," Gentry said of Odom.
"We're just waiting to hear some information from the league.
We've been trying to inquire, but until they say he's released from his suspension, we have to go under the assumption that he's not going to play."
Expect to see Corey Maggette filling in for Odom at the small forward spot for the seventh consecutive game today, when the Clippers host the New York Knicks at Staples Center.
"There are only so many people we can talk to at the league's headquarters in New York ," Gentry said.
"Obviously, when he gets released from his suspension it will be a news event.
Until then, we have to wait and be patient."
With Odom and backup point guard Keyon Dooling (sprained left ankle) unavailable, one might think Gentry would consider giving Quentin Richardson a start.
But Gentry prefers to use Richardson as a reserve.
"It's not really important to me," Richardson said.
"I just want to play.
As long as I'm playing, I'm happy with that.
My minutes are going up.
When my minutes go up, my confidence goes up."
Richardson has had three games of 20 points or more and two others of 17 points or more.
He is averaging 13.8 points in nine games--all as a sub.
vs. New York, 12:30 p.m.Site--Staples Center.
Radio--KXTA .
Records--Clippers 4-5, Knicks 4-6.
Record vs. Knicks --1-1.
Update--
The Knicks are winless in five road games heading into a three-game trip to play the Clippers, Golden State Warriors and Phoenix Suns.
Marcus Camby (sore left foot) and Larry Robinson (tendinitis in his right knee) are on the injured list and cannot play for the Knicks.
Tickets-- 462-2849.
Workplace:
Those who are often first to handle Capitol mail take precautions.
But amid concerns, they say, there is no panic. 
The nation's anthrax scare came home in a personal way Monday to an already jittery Capitol Hill.
The office manager for Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.) bought latex gloves and surgical masks, and Jeff Salassa, an intern who opens mail for a Michigan congressman, was so nervous that he went to a clinic to be tested for anthrax.
Meanwhile, Brian Kennedy, an aide to Rep. George Radanovich (R-Mariposa) called his mother in New Jersey to reassure her that there was no reason for him to go home.
"'We're not freaking out, but we are a little nervous of course," said an aide to a California lawmaker who asked not to be named.
Congressional staffers were directed to stop opening mail after an anthrax-contaminated letter turned up in the office of Sen. Tom Daschle (D-S.D.).
In the Hart Senate Office Building, where Daschle's office is located, word of the anthrax incident left senators and their staffs shaken.
Returning from lunch, Susan MacDonald, an aide to the Senate Commerce Committee, found herself stranded outside the building as District of Columbia firefighters sealed off the entrance on Constitution Avenue.
"It's scary, very scary," MacDonald said.
"You hear these things, you read about them, and now it's in our workplace."
But after a few minutes, the firetrucks left and the building reopened.
And aside from the quarantine of Daschle's suite on the fifth and sixth floors, the workday appeared to unfold more or less as usual.
The Senate floor was strangely calm as Daschle related the incident in a short speech.
The handful of senators present listened attentively but without evident alarm.
Sen. Frank H. Murkowski (R-Alaska), in fact, stood up after the majority leader spoke to announce that he, too, had received a suspicious delivery in his office that day.
His staff had called the Capitol police to report the incident and been told that 11 other similar calls had come in that day from both the House and Senate.
Having dispensed that news, Murkowski then launched into a speech in favor of drilling for oil in an Alaskan wildlife refuge.
The senator's staff was later told the envelope and its contents were harmless.
Lawmakers made it clear that they were determined to go about their business.
Sen. Christopher S. "Kit" Bond (R-Mo.)
issued a statement urging that everyone "keep your cool."
"The terrorists want to scare us," he said.
"They can only win if we give in to the fear."
Outside Daschle's chamber, Sen. Bill Frist (R-Tenn.) told reporters: "Anxiety here is up; vigilance is high.
No panic."
Feinstein shook her head in disbelief at the prospect of her staff's using gloves and masks to open the 22,000 pieces of mail received each week.
"We never thought we'd be here," she said.
Anxieties were already running high under the Capitol dome, believed to have been the target of the hijacked plane that crashed in a Pennsylvania field on Sept. 11.
Down the hall from Daschle's office, Sarah Berk, an aide to Sen. Larry Craig (R-Idaho), said that she felt reassured by the "quick and thorough response" of authorities.
But, she added, "One can't help but want to be tested."
"It's a little unnerving," Kennedy, the Radanovich aide, said.
But, he added, "I sense no panic."
Sen. John Kerry (D-Mass.) called about 40 staff members into his office to urge them to remain calm.
Monday's events "ought to be a reminder that coming to work here is now even more an act of defiance and patriotism," Kerry told staffers, said aide David Wade.
Since security briefings last week, many staffs were already changing their mail-handling protocol.
Like a lot of staffers, Berk was on the phone.
She called her mother in South Carolina. "
Every time we get evacuated, I call her," she said, adding that her parents were handling the latest news calmly.
Diane Benjamin, a Senate cafeteria cashier, said she saw a lot of nervous people. "
But I do believe in the Lord, so I try to leave everything in his hands."
Even though mail was halted, UPS delivery man Steve Hilley was making the rounds in Hart on Monday afternoon.
Hilley said some offices were accepting his packages and some weren't.
But he wasn't fazed.
"I'm not going to live my life in fear because of cowards," he said. 
Times staff writer Marisa Schultz contributed to this report.
Security:
No sign of the bacterium is uncovered at the executive mansion, Bush officials say.
The nation's anthrax scare escalated Tuesday as traces of the deadly bacterium were detected at an off-site mail facility serving the White House and the number of life-threatening infections continued to climb, spurring health officials to immediately begin antibiotic treatments for thousands of postal workers. 
White House officials stressed that no anthrax spores had been discovered in the executive mansion itself but said testing was underway on employees who work in the White House mail room and at a remote military facility where White House mail is processed. 
"We're making sure that the West Wing, the White House is safe," President Bush said Tuesday.
"I'm confident when I come to work tomorrow that I'll be safe." 
Bush brushed aside questions about whether he personally has been tested for anthrax, saying only: "I don't have anthrax." 
The discovery came as three more postal workers--two in Washington and one in New Jersey--were hospitalized with what is believed to be inhalation anthrax, the most deadly form of the disease. 
That would bring the total number of inhalation cases to nine, including seven postal workers.
There are three confirmed cases and at least three suspected cases in Washington, Florida and New Jersey.
Three other victims have died. 
Responding to a request by the postmaster general, Bush ordered the immediate allocation of $175 million to improve safety at U.S. postal facilities. 
Officials also confirmed that inhalation anthrax caused the deaths of Joseph P. Curseen, 47, and Thomas L. Morris Jr., 55, both of whom worked at Washington's main mail-processing facility.
They advised immediate treatment for thousands of postal employees, contractors and any others who spent time in the Brentwood mail facility, where an anthrax-laced letter to Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle (D-S.D.) was handled. 
Detection of anthrax spores at the White House's off-site mail facility focused even more attention on the Brentwood center, which also handles White House mail before it is sent to a military base miles away for security screening.
From there, the mail is trucked to the postal facility for additional screening before it is sorted and taken to the White House. 
Anthrax spores were discovered on a machine that opens letters at the off-site facility, but no contaminated letter has been found, according to White House spokesman Ari Fleischer.
He said environmental samples taken throughout the White House have come back negative for anthrax. 
It was unclear whether the anthrax found at the White House facility was caused by a new, undiscovered letter or if mail headed to the White House was somehow contaminated at the Brentwood facility. 
Contrary to some earlier statements, postal and health officials now say they doubt that anthrax spores could spread from one letter to another during processing.
Officials concede that developments continue to disprove their understanding of how the spores can be spread. 
Even if there was another anthrax-laden letter sent to the White House, Fleischer said enhanced security measures imposed there since the Sept. 11 attacks would make it unlikely that anyone in the White House would be exposed.
He declined to specify what precautions White House officials were taking with mail. 
Workers at the White House mail room and the off-site facility will be offered antibiotic treatment to prevent anthrax infection, Fleischer said. 
Meanwhile, hundreds of Washington postal workers who lined up Tuesday at D.C. General Hospital to be tested for anthrax exposure came away instead with a 10-day course of the antibiotic Cipro. 
The medication was given to anyone who worked in or visited the mail processing room of the Brentwood center in Northeast Washington, which handles all mail to the nation's capital, including letters and packages destined for Congress and the White House.
Health authorities also advised treatment for anyone who was exposed to the back rooms of the city's 36 other postal facilities, where mail from Brentwood is routed. 
"We need to treat and treat quickly," said Dr. Ivan Walks, chief of the city's Department of Health.
He spoke at a frenetic noon briefing as officials scrambled to contain a public health threat they do not fully understand and which has no precedent. 
The medicine and the attention were regarded as long overdue by many district postal workers.
They stayed on the job last week even as the House of Representatives shut down in fear of the deadly disease, only to see two of their colleagues die of anthrax. 
"We just had the impression that no one was concerned about us," said Michael Pailen, a letter carrier in downtown Washington for 29 years. 
City officials defended their actions but acknowledged they might have acted differently in hindsight. 
"In retrospect, we should have done a number of things earlier," said district Mayor Anthony Williams, who began Cipro treatment Tuesday along with his mother, a retired postal worker.
The mayor had visited the Brentwood plant last week.  
In New Jersey, where the anthrax-laced letters sent to Daschle and NBC anchor Tom Brokaw were processed, the mood among postal employees was similarly grim.
New Jersey Health Commissioner George DiFerdinando said 19 of the 59 environmental samples that were taken from the Hamilton processing center Sunday have tested positive for anthrax. 
Because of the high percentage of positive tests, the New Jersey health department and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention plan to expand tests in the post office. 
DiFerdinando said Tuesday that a postal employee from the Hamilton facility has been hospitalized since Friday with symptoms of inhalation anthrax.
Though initial tests for anthrax at the hospital were negative, follow-up tests conducted by the CDC were "suspected positive," according to state health officials. 
"People are so scared," said Valerie Williams, a postal clerk who has worked in the Hamilton distribution center for 15 years.
"No one knows who or what to believe any more." 
Health officials in Washington stressed that there was no evidence of contamination at postal facilities other than Brentwood.
Treatment for workers at other facilities was "a precautionary measure" pending a full assessment of any risks, they said. 
On Capitol Hill, where both houses were in session but six congressional office buildings remained closed, lawmakers grilled representatives from the CDC and the FBI about their handling of the anthrax outbreak in Washington. 
"There's something there that bothers us," said Sen. Tom Harkin (D-Iowa), chairman of the Senate subcommittee on labor, health and human services.
"I want to know how soon after the workers in Trenton were diagnosed did the CDC start doing something with employees at Brentwood." 
"It's difficult for me to fathom how anyone showing up at the hospital in the district would be sent home with flu-like symptoms," said Sen. Mary Landrieu (D-La.). 
Harkin also questioned whether turf wars between the FBI and CDC had caused delays in disseminating critical information to public health officials.
He asked the CDC to put together a chronology describing its actions over the last few days. 
Dr. Jeffrey P. Koplan, director of the CDC, said his agency has been actively tracking hospitals in Washington, D.C., New Jersey and Florida for potential cases of inhalation anthrax but that the two D.C. postal workers "didn't turn up." 
He cautioned against second-guessing doctors and hospital workers, noting that the symptoms of inhalation anthrax are common to many other ailments.
Doctors and health officials have little experience with detecting and treating anthrax that is not naturally occurring, Koplan said. 
"Knowing what we know today, would we have done things differently?
Yes," Koplan said. 
Until the deaths of the postal workers this week, health officials did not believe inhalation anthrax could be spread through a sealed envelope containing the spores. 
"We have been on a steep curve of learning," said Dr. Rima Khabbazz of the CDC. 
Tim Caruso, FBI deputy assistant director of counter-terrorism, stressed that criminal investigators were sharing information about the anthrax cases with health officials, even if such information is classified, to prevent further anthrax exposure. 
"We find a way to get them information to save lives," Caruso said.
To ensure cooperation and coordination, the FBI and CDC also have assigned investigators to work at one another's headquarters to monitor the investigations. 
Doctors in suburban Virginia said Tuesday evening that they continue to monitor two Washington postal workers diagnosed this weekend with inhalation anthrax.
They remain in serious condition. 
"They are awake, talking and moving on their own," said Dr. Susan Matcha, who is treating the patients at Inova Fairfax Hospital. 
Both patients began having flu-like symptoms Oct. 17, she said. 
The first patient was admitted Friday afternoon with a fever, muscle aches, sweating and fatigue.
The second was admitted to the hospital Sunday morning with symptoms including fever and headache. 
They are being treated with three kinds of antibiotics: Cipro, Rifampin and Clindamycin, Matcha said.
Another doctor said Tuesday that he is concerned that patients infected with skin anthrax may later show signs of the bacterium in the blood, an unexpected new wrinkle. 
Dr. Ron Goren, an infectious disease specialist at Frankford Hospital in Oxford Valley, Pa., who treated one of the New Jersey postal workers, reported that two cutaneous anthrax cases--a New Jersey postal worker and an infant infected at ABC news studios in New York--have showed evidence of anthrax bacteria in their blood. 
The development was unusual, Goren said, in that previous medical knowledge of skin anthrax did not suggest that likelihood.
It also hinted at the possibility that skin anthrax, left untreated, could transform into a more dangerous form of the disease.  
Times staff writers Stephen Braun, Megan Garvey, James Gerstenzang and Marisa Schultz in Washington and John Goldman and P.J. Huffstutter in New York contributed to this story.
Telecom: AT&T Wireless, Sprint PCS and Nextel shares close up 3% to 7% on increased mobile unit demand.
Wall Street bid up shares in mobile phone providers Wednesday in anticipation of increased cell phone sales and subscriptions because of last week's terrorist attacks.
Wireless phone companies AT&T Wireless Services Inc., Sprint PCS Group and Nextel Communications Inc.--
three of the nation's largest carriers--saw their shares close up 3% to 7% on Wednesday.
Sprint PCS rose 90 cents to $24.78, AT&T Wireless jumped $1.02 to $15, both on the New York Stock Exchange, and Nextel increased 59 cents to close at $9.90 on Nasdaq.
And Verizon Wireless' parent company, Verizon Communications , saw its shares rise $2.20 to $53.90 on the NYSE.
Among phone makers, Nokia rose 84 cents to $16.06, Motorola increased 3 cents to $15.48 , both on the NYSE, while Ericsson fell 3 cents to close at $3.47 on Nasdaq.
Analysts said the stock uptick reflects growing anecdotal evidence that consumers who have never owned a cell phone are heading into stores after learning how passengers on the doomed planes and workers in the World Trade Center used cell phones to reach family and friends.
Others cited cell phones as being critical in lower Manhattan, where phone service has been disrupted.
"Wireless companies and their vendors are saying that people are rushing out and buying cell phones after this tragedy," Guzman & Co. analyst Patrick Comack said.
"People want to have a cell phone at all times in case of emergency now."
Comack said mobile phone vendors sold a month's worth of phones last week.
Credit Suisse First Boston analyst Cynthia Motz said wireless phone companies also saw a surge in minutes billed after last week's attacks.
Clay Owen, a spokesman for Cingular Wireless in Atlanta, said the company saw increased sales in certain areas, including Philadelphia and San Diego, but sales were normal in other places.
On Wednesday, Jimmy Nguyen of Irvine went to a Best Buy store in Costa Mesa to change service providers.
"There's a lot of dead coverage areas in Irvine near my house," said Nguyen, who has service with Cingular Wireless, but is switching to Sprint PCS.
"We heard a lot of people called out with their cell phones during the emergency . . .
I want to switch to a company where I'll be sure to have coverage."
Even so, analysts caution that any short-term sales jump probably won't alter the industry's outlook.
"We don't really see this accelerating any type of overall demand," said Tim Burke, an analyst at Edward Jones.
Burke said he expects wireless carriers to continue booking subscribers "at a record pace" in the United States, where cell phone penetration rates lag far behind Europe.
Analysts expect the U.S. cell phone penetration rate to grow this year to 45% of the population, up from about 38%.
Wireless phone shipments by manufacturers have plunged so far this year as the economy has slowed.    
Reuters was used in compiling this report.
Congress: House measure includes it, Senate's does not.
Both aim to broaden law enforcement's powers.
The Senate and House are poised to pass separate anti-terrorism bills next week with differences on key provisions that could complicate the prospects for a final agreement.
Those differences came into clear view Thursday after Senate negotiators disclosed details of an agreement they reached during marathon talks the night before with the White House.
Both bills would dramatically expand law enforcement's surveillance powers, increase penalties for terrorist crimes and allow for longer detention of noncitizens suspected of terrorist activity.
But the two chambers differ on the scope of some of these new powers and on a number of provisions designed to guard against the erosion of civil liberties.
The main sticking point is a provision in the House bill that would cause law enforcement's new surveillance authority to expire after two years.
The clause was included to appease House members who fear the sweeping powers proposed for law enforcement would be vulnerable to abuse and ought to be reexamined in 2003.
The Senate, acceding to White House demands, did not include such a "sunset provision."
Rep. F. James Sensenbrenner Jr.
(R-Wis.), chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, said the discrepancy could be a major obstacle.
"That would cause great difficulties in the House because the sunset provision was the principal compromise that got the agreement," Sensenbrenner said.
Without that provision, he said, the bill could either fail in the House or pass by such a narrow margin that it would send an unfortunate signal about the nation's resolve.
"The question the administration is going to have to answer is what message we want to send to the world," Sensenbrenner said.
"If it looks like the air of bipartisanship is falling apart, that will be interpreted by the terrorists that maybe America is not as united in meeting this threat."
The provision exposes a rare rift between the House GOP's leadership and the administration, which has argued against a termination clause in legislation that Atty.
Gen. John Ashcroft says is critical to the country's ability to defend against terrorist attacks.
"No one can guarantee that terrorism will sunset in two years," Ashcroft said Thursday.
"Our laws need to reflect the new war. . . .
It must provide us with tools on a continuing basis to do so."
White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said President Bush shares Ashcroft's concern.
The sunset clause would apply to portions of the legislation that ease restrictions on electronic surveillance.
Among them are provisions that would allow law enforcement to eavesdrop on e-mail and other computer communications without permission from a court; to obtain wiretapping authority for multiple jurisdictions from a single court; and to deploy "roving" wiretaps that allow investigators to monitor a suspect's communications across multiple devices.
On several other fronts, the House and Senate bills are virtually identical, scaling back or scrapping entirely some of the most controversial proposals made by the White House after the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon.
Both bills would allow investigators to detain noncitizens suspected of terrorist activity for at most seven days before having to file charges or release the detainees.
Ashcroft had sought authority to hold such suspects indefinitely.
Both bills also would broaden law enforcement's power to pursue wiretap authority under guidelines for gathering foreign intelligence.
Ashcroft had sought sweeping clearance to conduct such wiretaps.
But lawmakers said authorities would need to show that seeking foreign intelligence is "a significant purpose" of the surveillance.
The Senate and House bills also set similar guidelines that allow law enforcement greater freedom to share information culled from wiretaps and other sources with intelligence agencies when terrorist threats are identified.
The Senate agreement was announced late Wednesday.
Majority Leader Tom Daschle (D-S.D.) indicated that he plans to push the bill through the Senate swiftly by bringing it directly to the floor next week, rather than waiting for it to be reviewed by the Judiciary Committee.
Security: The president is out to boost public confidence in flying.
A broader federal role is part of the plan.
President Bush, seeking to reassure worried travelers, will call today for more government involvement in airport security screening, installation of assault-resistant cockpit doors and a dramatic increase in the federal air marshal program, congressional and aviation sources said Wednesday.
The proposals amount to a broad expansion of the federal role in airport security but stop short of advocating a direct federal takeover of passenger screening, which is now in the hands of private companies hired by the airlines.
Instead, Bush favors much higher standards, better pay and closer federal oversight of screeners, as well as the deployment of local law enforcement officers to airport security checkpoints, sources said.
Administration officials were also considering a federally chartered nonprofit corporation to administer airport security.
As for arming pilots, which was proposed by the Air Line Pilots Assn.
, Bush indicated to reporters Wednesday that he is not enthusiastic about the idea.
Congressional sources said it will not be part of his plan.
The president will travel to Chicago's O'Hare International Airport today to make his announcement, along with Transportation Secretary Norman Y. Mineta and a bipartisan congressional delegation.
"One of my concerns is that this terrible incident has . . .
convinced many Americans to stay at home," Bush said Wednesday of the Sept. 11 attacks. "
And one of the keys to economic recovery is going to be the vitality" of the airlines.
"We'll announce some confidence-boosting measures, some concrete proposals, and I believe we'll be able to work with Congress to get them done in an expeditious way," Bush added.
His comments in a brief session with reporters came at a White House meeting with Muslim and Arab American leaders.
Officials said details of the plan were still in flux Wednesday evening.
Among the measures under consideration was a proposal for video cameras to monitor airliner cockpits and cabins.
"We should be using the same kind of video cameras that are used in ATM machines," said Sen. Richard Durbin (D-Ill.), who will accompany the president today.
Rep. John Mica (R-Fla.), chairman of the House Transportation aviation subcommittee, said Bush plans to announce a "dramatic expansion" of the sky marshal program.
The size of the federal air marshal program is kept a secret.
But before the Sept. 11 attacks, several members of Congress had indicated that there were only a few dozen marshals in the program.
Since the hijackings, their ranks have been bolstered by agents from other federal law enforcement agencies, authorities said.
And the Federal Aviation Administration has received hundreds of inquiries from citizens who are interested in becoming marshals.
Another congressional official said the goal is to have an undercover marshal on most flights.
There are an estimated 25,000 daily airline takeoffs, but many involve relatively short hops between cities.
Other likely measures include wider use of a computer program that can identify passengers who pose a potential security threat, and an overhaul of antihijacking training for pilots and flight attendants, who now rely on manuals based on the rash of hijackings to Cuba in the 1960s and '70s.
Congressional sources said Bush will also propose more federal funding to help airports pay for improved security.
Although all airports except Washington's Reagan National have reopened, travelers have not flocked back to the skies.
In an interview Friday, Mineta estimated that airlines are flying about 80% of their previous schedules with passenger loads less than half of what they were before Sept. 11.
Congress has approved a bailout package for the industry, but only a return of consumer confidence can restore it to health.
Meanwhile, businesses that depend on airlines to transport their customers--such as theme parks, hotels and car rental companies--are also taking an economic hit.
Congress is not likely to rubber-stamp the president's package, particularly if pilots, flight attendants and other aviation interests raise doubts that it will do the job.
Lawmakers consider themselves experts on air travel, since they must constantly shuttle back and forth to their districts.
They can easily imagine themselves in the place of passengers aboard one of the four hijacked jets.
"The biggest frequent flier club in America is made up of members of Congress," Durbin said.
"We spend many of our waking moments on airliners and in airports.
I've gone through those checkpoints, and I've seen the worst."
The critical test of Bush's plan, lawmakers said, is whether it significantly improves airport security through passenger and employee screening.
The FAA has already ordered more thorough background checks for employees, and new FAA standards for passenger screening were due out before the hijackings.
But lawmakers say more is needed.
"I want real supervision and a new atmosphere at these security checkpoints," Durbin said.
Although he would prefer that federal employees take over the job, Durbin said he is keeping an open mind about what Bush may propose.
Under one scenario still being considered by the administration, a nonprofit corporation would set standards, establish training protocols and provide close supervision of the security checkpoint workers.
"I want results; I don't care if they are federal employees, or they work for the private sector," Durbin said.
Senate staffers say there is strong bipartisan sentiment in that chamber for having federal employees take over airport security.
But in the House, conservatives are reluctant to expand the size of the federal work force by thousands.
Mica, the House aviation chairman, said he expects a compromise to be reached.
"The standards definitely will be federal" for training, background checks and supervision, he said.
Television:
The cable news channel tells other networks it will not enforce its exclusive deal with Al Jazeera.
CNN News Group Chairman Walter Isaacson called his counterparts at other networks late Monday in an attempt to defuse an increasingly heated public feud over CNN's attempts to obtain exclusive footage from inside Afghanistan. 
His calls came after CNN's partner, the Qatar-based Al Jazeera TV network, sent stern letters to other networks Monday threatening to take legal action if they continue to use Al Jazeera footage that is supposed to be exclusive to CNN for the first six hours after transmission. 
Isaacson's move is the latest in a series of actions and reactions that began Saturday, when CNN issued notice to its rival broadcast and cable news channels that it had reached an agreement giving it exclusive rights to broadcast any Al Jazeera video for the first six hours.
That agreement quickly came under fire when Al Jazeera--the only network officially authorized by Afghanistan's ruling Taliban to send live pictures from inside the country--got footage of U.S.-led attacks, as well as an apparently prerecorded statement from Osama bin Laden. 
All major TV news organizations ignored the CNN embargo and immediately began airing the video, citing its compelling news value. 
CNN says it has paid nothing for the exclusive arrangement, and there were indications Monday that the cable news network is not inclined to press its legal rights in the case.
Indeed, Isaacson told other network presidents that CNN had no intention of enforcing its exclusive deal, according to executives at the networks receiving his call.
At the same time, a CNN spokesman released a statement saying, "Yes, we believe that we have an exclusive on this footage, and we believe that the exclusivity is enforceable, but we're not going to enforce it in this unique circumstance because of the compelling national interest." 
That was in marked contrast to a letter Al Jazeera faxed Monday that said in part: "Although this Sunday usage is considered an act of piracy, CNN and Al Jazeera made a decision to ignore it for one day only.
This note shall serve as notice to all Al Jazeera clients and affiliates that the CNN-Al Jazeera exclusive agreement is still in place and if we have to, we will enforce it through our legal departments." 
A CBS News spokeswoman said the network is "gratified CNN changed their position," but noted in a statement that, in the future, "If there is material that is of vital importance, CBS News will give strong consideration to broadcasting it despite attempts by a competitor to keep it from parts of the American public." 
"My feeling is, if Al Jazeera has some video that is in the national interest, we would use it again," said Erik Sorenson, president of CNN rival MSNBC. 
Separately, TV news organizations said they had no qualms about airing the video statement from Bin Laden as soon as it was made available Sunday, giving him virtually unfettered access to American airwaves. 
"It was pretty obvious it was something we should air," said Marcy McGinnis, CBS News senior vice president of news coverage. 
NBC discussed what to do with the material and concluded it was appropriate to air it, said Steve Capus, executive producer of "NBC Nightly News."
"It was the first time since the Sept. 11 attacks that there has been a statement from him, and it was as close as he's come to acknowledging responsibility for the attacks," Capus said. 
But NBC, CBS and Fox News Channel said they felt obliged to add qualifications.
"We definitely thought it should be aired, but we had to qualify the whole thing . . .
that we had no verification of where it is, when it was shot, all those kind of disclaimers," said John Stack, vice president of news gathering for Fox News Channel.
"With those in mind, we were comfortable airing it."
Crime: President Bush names 22 Middle Easterners sought for anti-American attacks.
A bounty of $5 million is offered for each man.
President Bush on Wednesday unveiled a list of the world's 22 "most wanted" terrorists--all Middle Easterners who the administration says have "blood on their hands"--and offered tens of millions of dollars in bounty money to help bring them to justice. 
Some of the alleged terrorists have been sought by the U.S. government for as long as 16 years for their roles in anti-American attacks.
Sources say at least 14 operatives among the group have apparent links to Osama bin Laden's Al Qaeda terrorist network. 
Bush's most-wanted list, which will go out on leaflets, matchbooks, the Internet and TV airwaves around the world, offers both the lure of riches to anyone who helps capture the terrorists and the veiled threat of retaliation against nations that may harbor them. 
"The real value," said former Deputy Atty.
Gen. Eric H. Holder, "is that the United States has now identified to the world who these terrorists are, and that puts real pressure on those nations who are giving lip service to the notion that they're against terrorism." 
Bush, in broadening the U.S. wrath to extend beyond Bin Laden, may be seeking to apply particular pressure to officials in Tehran and Baghdad, experts say.
U.S. intelligence officials believe that Iran is harboring as many as seven terrorists and hijackers on the list.
Iraq is thought to be a safe haven of a most wanted terrorist who was indicted but never arrested in the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center. 
Sen. Orrin G. Hatch (R-Utah), a senior member of both the Senate intelligence and judiciary committees who has been briefed extensively on the Sept. 11 terror probe, said Wednesday that he is "very confident" that Saddam Hussein's regime in Iraq played a role in last month's attacks. 
Mohamed Atta, the suspected ringleader of the suicide hijackers, is known to have met at least once this year with an Iraqi intelligence official in Europe, a meeting that is drawing scrutiny from U.S. investigators. 
Although Hatch would not discuss the basis for his conclusions, he said in an interview that "Iraq has been harboring these terrorists for a long time. . . .
I believe that Iraq is ultimately going to be proven to have been a part of this." 
The Bush administration has withheld public judgment on whether it believes Iraq was involved in the Sept. 11 attacks.
If Baghdad's involvement were confirmed, it could open the way for the United States to include Iraq in its anti-terrorist military campaign. 
Similarly, some experts say Iran could face military attack by the United States if it does not cooperate in efforts to locate and apprehend terrorists within its borders. 
"If there is a highlight here in the most-wanted list , it is Iran," said Vince Cannistraro, the former CIA chief of counter-terrorism.
"These are wanted people who are hiding in Iran and even being harbored by Iran." 
One of the highest-profile fugitives on the list, besides Bin Laden, is Imad Mughniyah, one of three men indicted in the 1985 hijacking of TWA Flight 847. 
Mughniyah, according to Cannistraro and others, lives in Tehran and is affiliated with--and protected by--the Iranian intelligence service. 
"Mughniyah is a subsidiary of the Iranian government; a wholly owned subsidiary of Iranian intelligence," Cannistraro said. 
Also believed to be living in Iran are four men who were indicted several months ago for the bombing of the Khobar Towers military housing complex in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia. 
Terrorists drove a tanker truck into the complex June 25, 1996, and detonated a powerful explosive, killing 19 U.S. Air Force personnel, wounding 372 others and damaging several military facilities. 
Of the 14 men indicted for their roles in that attack, Bush singled out Ahmed Ibrahim Mughassil, Ali Saed bin Ali Houri, Ibrahim Salih Mohammed Yacoub and Abdelkarim Hussein Mohammed Nasser for inclusion on his most-wanted list. 
Authorities on Wednesday identified Mughassil as the leader of the terrorist cell that carried out the Khobar Towers attack and said he was among a handful of terrorists most wanted by the U.S. government. 
"He has been at the top of the list for years," said one counter-terror official. 
Also on the list are two of Bin Laden's top lieutenants, Mohammed Atef and Ayman Zawahiri, who were indicted in the 1998 bombings of two U.S. embassies in Africa.
They are believed to be with him in Afghanistan. 
"If you could pull a trifecta and get Bin Laden, Zawahiri and Atef, you deal a serious, serious blow to Al Qaeda and the Egyptian Islamic Jihad," an organization that has merged with Bin Laden's network, said one Clinton administration official. 
Bush released the list at FBI headquarters.
Also present Atty.
Gen. John Ashcroft, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and FBI Director Robert S. Mueller.
Bush said the 22 alleged terrorists on the FBI's new list "do not account for all the terrorist activity in the world, but they are among the most dangerous--the leaders and key supporters, the planners and strategists.
They must be found.
They will be stopped, and they will be punished." 
Added Powell: "Many of the individuals we are seeking are part of the Al Qaeda leadership.
They have blood on their hands from Sept. 11th and from other acts against America in Kenya, Tanzania and Yemen," the site of the bombing of the destroyer Cole last year, which killed 17 sailors. 
The list, which Bush called "the newest weapon in America's war on terrorism," is modeled after one of the FBI's most famous and successful inventions: its "most-wanted" list, thumbtacked onto post office walls and immortalized on TV and in movies. 
The FBI's list has helped authorities capture 438 dangerous fugitives through the years--a 94% success rate. 
But U.S. intelligence officials do not know where some of the 22 alleged terrorists are. 
"There are other people on that list who--within a ZIP code--we're pretty sure where they are," but resistance from harboring nations has prevented their arrests, said one senior law enforcement official. 
U.S. authorities hope that the lure of millions in reward money will make a difference. 
Since the Sept. 11 attacks, the State Department has increased its reward pot from $5 million to $20 million, with a reward of $5 million for the capture of each man on the list.
The names and backgrounds of the 22 fugitives are listed at www.dss rewards.net. 
The FBI's Mueller noted that convicted terrorist Ramzi Ahmed Yousef was brought to justice because someone in Pakistan wanted--and was paid--the bounty the U.S. government had placed on him. 
Yousef, a Kuwaiti-born munitions expert, had tried to topple the World Trade Center's towers with a huge bomb.
He escaped an FBI dragnet and was in the process of plotting to take down a dozen commercial airplanes when the Pakistani government arrested him.
He was later turned over to the U.S. government and convicted of the airliner plot. 
However, one federal counter-terror authority questioned the effectiveness of the multimillion-dollar reward campaign, citing several instances where it hasn't worked. 
The official noted that Bin Laden has had a $5-million bounty on his head for years, stemming from his alleged role as the mastermind of the 1998 embassy bombings in Africa. 
And Abdelmajid Dahoumane, an accomplice of millennium bomber Ahmed Ressam, also had a $5-million bounty but traveled extensively through Europe and the Middle East for more than eight months and was never turned in. 
"Everyone knew who he was, but no one coughed him up," the official said.
"They don't want to turn in a brother.
There was as much money offered for him as for Bin Laden, and nobody dropped a dime." 
Another cautionary note came from Islamic leaders, who questioned why Bush's most-wanted list featured only Middle Easterners and included no fugitives from terrorist groups within Latin America, Asia or the United States. 
"This creates a very troubling perception," said Ibrahim Hooper, spokesman for the Council on American-Islamic Relations, an advocacy group in Washington.
"This list perpetuates the stereotype that while all Muslims may not be terrorists, all terrorists are Muslims."
Asia: Abdul Haq, who battled the Soviets, is one of the biggest threats to the Taliban.
Abdul Haq's medals are his many battle scars, but after he helped win the war to liberate Afghanistan from Soviet occupation, he suffered his worst pain in the struggle for a lasting peace.
Two years ago, when the former guerrilla fighter was trying to persuade Afghans to end their relentless civil war, a pair of masked gunmen scaled the wall of his home in this city near the Afghan border and killed his wife and 11-year-old son and their bodyguard.
Haq was out of the country in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, but the intruders probably intended to silence a powerful voice for change, just as killers have eliminated several Afghan peace activists in Pakistan in recent years.
Haq, a leader of Afghanistan's moderates in exile, shares the Pushtun blood of the country's Taliban rulers--making him one of the biggest threats to an extremist regime condemned around the world for harboring suspected terrorist Osama bin Laden and his associates.
Haq, a Cold War ally of the United States who led the single most destructive attack on occupying Soviet forces 15 years ago, is not easily frightened.
But he tired of Afghanistan's endless killing long ago, and when the blood spilled in his own home, he decided that it was time to give up and leave the region.
Last week, he returned to Peshawar from self-exile with a new fire in his eyes.
Among the many effects the Sept. 11 terrorist strikes against the U.S. had in the world was that they helped convince Haq to come out of retirement and, if necessary, take up arms again to get rid of the rulers he sees destroying his country.
"You don't want to fight just because you want to fight.
You have to have an objective to fight for," he said in an interview in his sitting room.
"If people from the north don't accept people from the south--if commanders don't want a united system of government--then someone will have to find a way, even if you have to remove them militarily.
"We are in that stage now.
I'm working on these things, and there are many questions I still don't have answers for."
Haq says he is in contact with Pushtun commanders in his homeland, trying to persuade them to break away from the Taliban and join a new coalition pressing for a government of national unity.
It would be chosen by a traditional grand council of tribal chiefs, sitting with exiled King Mohammed Zahir Shah as its figurehead.
An estimated 40% of Afghans are Pushtun, and as the country's largest ethnic group, they are crucial to the stability of any government that might replace the Taliban.
Dressed in a bright white shirt and pants outfit known as a shalwar kameez, Haq has an almost regal air.
Though he is only 40--and still strong--he seems weighed down, weary of all he knows.
He was wounded 16 times in the war that followed the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979.
He lost his right foot to a land mine and knows he is taking yet another dangerous risk by stepping back into the Afghan morass.
He was assisting United Nations peace efforts as a mediator, and pushing hard for Afghans to negotiate their own solution to the civil war, when the gunmen called on his Peshawar home.
No suspects in the attack were named, and Haq refuses to speculate about who was behind the slayings.
But the U.S. State Department concluded in a 1999 report on human rights abuses that the killers probably were trying to assassinate Haq in a dirty war against moderate Afghan leaders, "widely believed to be part of a wider Taliban campaign."
Haq has known war most of his adult life.
He became a rebel in 1977, at age 16, working with the anti-Communist underground in the Afghan capital, Kabul.
He was jailed, but he says his family bought his freedom with a huge bribe.
When the Soviet Red Army invaded two years later, Haq joined the jihad as a commander for Hezb-i-Islami, one of several moujahedeen factions that were supplied with weapons by the CIA.
Haq formed the Kabul Front in 1981 and was the first moujahedeen commander to bring the war to the capital.
On Oct. 19, 1986, he led three of his fighters across minefields, in the dark, to the Soviet base near Lake Karga, just outside Kabul.
They were armed with three 103-millimeter rockets and a heavy launcher, which they set up about a third of a mile from the front gate of the base.
Their target was a bunker entrance to a massive weapons storage area.
The gunner fired two rockets.
Both were wide of the mark.
"I gave him a slap and said, 'If you miss this time, I'll kill you,' " Haq recalled, and the memory of that terrifying night made him chuckle.
The gunner fired a third time, an incendiary round, and scored a direct hit.
After a few minutes, the bunker exploded, and a fire spread to the weapons dump.
Someone caught the attack on videotape from the nearby British Embassy.
The sheer gall of the attack, and the precision of its execution, guaranteed Haq a prominent place in the lore of the moujahedeen war.
He laid down his Kalashnikov assault rifle after he and other moujahedeen drove out Soviet forces in 1989, and then the Afghan liberators turned on one another in a relentless civil war.
"Up to that time, to have a gun in your hands was a matter of pride because you were defending your country, your homeland--your people," he said.
"That's why I was the first to drop my gun after the withdrawal of the Russian forces, because one way or another, you would be involved in the killing of your own people."
As a peacemaker, Haq may be helped by his family ties.
His brother Abdul Qadir is a commander with the opposition Northern Alliance--dominated by ethnic Tajiks and Uzbeks--and a former governor of the eastern province of Nangahar.
Their elder brother, Haji Din Mohammed, was a senior commander in Hezb-i-Islami--one who can help twist arms.
Pir Sayed Ishaq Gailani, a Pushtun and longtime royalist, says he hadn't spoken to Din Mohammed in 24 years until he came by to talk peace Wednesday.
"Now Afghans are breaking down these old walls," Gailani said.
"They sit together, talk together and, after one or two days, they are friends.
This is a good sign."
Haq hopes to work the same magic in his talks with "former colleagues and Taliban commanders.
" It won't be simple for an old soldier with little patience for politics.
"The easiest thing in the world is to take a gun and fight," he said.
"To talk, and convince people, is difficult.
In war, if you don't like someone, you just shoot him.
But in diplomacy, whether you like him or not, you have to smile and talk to him."
Haq got some early lessons in the art, and failings, of diplomacy.
In early 1985, midway through the war against the Soviets, he left Afghanistan for a tour of Western capitals that took him to Washington.
He was invited to brief President Reagan's national security advisor, Robert McFarlane.
The disagreements Haq had with McFarlane and other administration officials--and much of what has happened in Afghanistan since--left him convinced that foreign governments led by the U.S. used Afghans as pawns in the Cold War and didn't care what happened once the Soviets were defeated.
It was U.S. allies such as Saudi Arabia that sent holy warriors, including Bin Laden, into Afghanistan to fight alongside Afghan moujahedeen, and the U.S. is suffering the consequences for leaving others to clean up the mess, Haq says.
"Because of the Russian withdrawal, many people in the U.S. government got big medals, promotions and early retirement, because they did such a great job," he said bitterly. "
But these foreign people who they brought to Afghanistan are causing problems in my country.
"Now for that they are punishing us.
How many of the CIA people were fired?
None.
Now we are paying the price for that."
Spending: Money will fund decontamination facilities, other measures to boost county's ability to prevent and respond to terrorist attacks.
Los Angeles County supervisors approved $6.8 million in extra spending to battle terrorism Tuesday, the first step in a nearly $100-million campaign to boost the ability of local fire, health and sheriff's departments to prevent and respond to potential attacks. 
The money approved Tuesday will fund, among other things, decontamination facilities at four county hospitals, increased sheriff's and district attorney's intelligence operations and additional concrete barriers at key county facilities. 
Separately, the county's Department of Public Works is spending $1 million to tighten security at county dams, water systems and regional airports. 
The sum approved by supervisors Tuesday is a fraction of the roughly $100-million anti-terrorism wish list that county agencies compiled earlier this month.
Most of those items--including satellite phones, extra firefighters and new computer systems for the coroner's office that can recognize patterns of biological warfare--would be purchased with state or federal money rather than funds available to supervisors. 
County Chief Administrative Officer
David Janssen said that county agencies are seeking another $92 million in outside funding. 
Still, Janssen left unfilled more than $10 million in requests from county agencies for additional resources to combat terrorism, including money to step up security at county generating plants and screen for weapons carried by visitors to the county Hall of Administration.
Janssen said he did not believe those requests were a high enough priority. 
Supervisors, who approved the package unanimously during an unusual closed session, said they would reconsider additional spending as merited. 
"It's a necessary beginning," Supervisor Zev Yaroslavsky said.
"Whether we need to spend more or not, time will tell." 
The approval took place amid an increasingly dire county budget picture.
The county gets much of its funding from the state, which is facing a large and growing deficit.
Supervisors were scheduled to allocate nearly $220 million in unspent funds Tuesday, but postponed most decisions other than the counter-terrorism package until December in light of the worsening economy. 
Supervisors approved $9 million to improve probation facilities in the wake of a civil rights probe by the U.S. Department of Justice.
The other big-ticket item was the terrorism package. 
The package includes $1.5 million for 16 additional sheriff's investigators and two district attorney's investigators to investigate and coordinate counter-terrorism probes.
It also includes $1.4 million to protect against cyber-terrorism, as well as money to add barricades and computer security systems in various county buildings.
The board also approved $279,000 to temporarily boost the county's Human Relations Commission staff, which has been overwhelmed with hate crimes reports since Sept. 11. 
Finally, supervisors approved $1 million in extra health spending for programs that they had already green-lighted last week in closed session.
At that time, county officials said the health department would pay for the new measures out of its existing budget. 
But on Tuesday, supervisors approved extra money for the health agency's steps, which include extra staff to train private physicians on recognizing signs of biological warfare and extra equipment for paramedic crews to protect against attacks. 
Some supervisors and their aides have grumbled about the manner in which the anti-terrorism spending has been approved.
Since Sept. 11, supervisors have held almost no discussion of security during the public portion of their weekly meeting.
Instead, they have gone behind closed doors to get reports and requests from their agencies, citing security concerns. 
On Tuesday, Chief Administrative Officer Janssen told supervisors that discussions on the budget items related to terrorism should take place in private. 
Yaroslavsky said he was alarmed at that, saying it was a possible violation of the state's open meeting law. 
"If we're talking about an investigation or something, that's another story," Yaroslavsky said.
But "if you're talking about how much money we should spend, I think that's something the public should know about." 
Supervisor Don Knabe said he believed there were legitimate security concerns that merited discussing the terrorism proposals privately.
And County Counsel Lloyd W. Pellman said doing so would not violate the law because the county would publicly announce how it spent the money. 
Supervisor Gloria Molina, whose staff said she was perturbed at the way the issue was being handled, said that the supervisors would come back into public session to vote on the package, which Yaroslavsky said eased his concerns.
But the vote was held in closed session and announced over the public-address system.
Citing internment camps, civil rights groups plan a candlelight vigil in support of Muslims and Arab Americans. 
Rui Satamura's high school yearbooks evoke bitter memories--of being called a "Jap" and spending two years in an Arizona internment camp. 
She once had two sets of yearbooks.
She kept the pair created for students at camp but tossed out the ones from Los Angeles High School, symbolically banishing the pain. 
Now, since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, people have vandalized Islamic institutions, and Arab Americans have complained that men of Middle Eastern appearance have been taken off airplanes for questioning. 
The FBI, meanwhile, is investigating the fatal shooting of a Pakistani grocer in Dallas, and Arizona authorities said racial hatred triggered the killing of a Sikh gas station attendant in Mesa.
In those two cases, the victims were neither Muslim nor Arab. 
"If they look like they are people from the Middle East, they are targeted," said Satamura, 78. 
For Satamura and other older Japanese Americans, the scattered assaults on Arab Americans and Muslims are opening afresh a wound that never completely healed. 
Even as they join in the nation's mass grieving and decry the terrorists' deeds, they are reliving their own experiences of being shunned by neighbors and carted off to internment camps after the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor. 
No one has called for detaining Arab Americans en masse, and, unlike 1942, many political leaders and clergy are urging tolerance. 
President Bush, referring to his Transportation secretary, said last week that the nation "can't have another situation like the one Norm Mineta was in during World War II.
" As a boy of 10, Norman Y. Mineta, a former Democratic congressman from San Jose, was interned along with his family. 
With some law enforcement agencies advocating the use of racial profiling as they seek out suspected terrorists, Japanese Americans are eagerly sharing their wartime recollections and saying that what happened to them must not happen again.
To show support for Arab Americans and Muslims, two Japanese American civil rights organizations plan a candlelight vigil in Little Tokyo Friday evening. 
"There was a rush to judgment about us during World War II," said John Tateishi, national executive director of the Japanese American Citizens League.
"As angered as we all are by this dastardly act, it's really important we maintain our protections and sense of democracy and fair play." 
A sense of fair play was a quick casualty once the United States entered the war, said Jim Hirabayashi, a retired anthropologist from San Francisco State University. 
"If the rights that you have aren't any good during times of crisis, they're not very good at all," said Hirabayashi, 74.
"If you erode away your rights at any time, then it's an erosion of the basic American democracy." 
In 1942, Hirabayashi's large family was forced to move from a small rural enclave in Washington state to Tule Lake Segregation Center, the benign official name of a remote outpost on the California-Oregon border. 
His brother Gordon, now in his 80s, was one of a few who defied the infamous Executive Order 9066, which led to the internment of about 112,000 residents of Japanese descent, two-thirds of whom were American citizens.
Gordon, a Quaker pacifist who was in his senior year at the University of Washington, violated curfew orders aimed primarily at Japanese Americans and then refused to serve in the military.
He spent two years in jail. 
Gordon Hirabayashi challenged the curfew order and another order requiring the banishment of Japanese Americans from the West Coast.
He pushed his court battle to the U.S. Supreme Court, which ruled against him.
More than 40 years later, in 1987, a federal appeals court threw out his conviction after government documents were unearthed that showed the military knew Japanese Americans posed no threat during the war. 
But at the time, many people perceived Japanese Americans as a threat. 
Mary Hatate, who like Satamura lives in the Keiro Retirement Home in Los Angeles, was 12 when the Japanese pounded Pearl Harbor.
For a long time after, she said, she felt as if she wanted to disappear whenever anyone mentioned "the enemy." 
The bombing occurred on a Sunday, and children reported back to school Monday, when President Franklin D. Roosevelt's "Date of Infamy" speech was broadcast. 
"I remember, I wanted to crouch down in my seat," Hatate said.
"I don't know if it was because I was frightened or embarrassed.
I just remember trying to hide." 
Keiro resident Grace Morikawa, 75, recalled that the abuse continued even at war's end.
After she was released from camp, she returned to Eagle Rock and put an ad in the newspaper soliciting work.
The hate calls started soon after.
One day someone planted a sign on the front lawn that said "Here Lives a Jap." 
Many Japanese Americans doubt that today's society would tolerate another roundup of people based on ancestry. 
"I think there are too many people willing to stand up against that," Tateishi said.
"There are too many political leaders in the Congress who would oppose it." 
One key difference between World War II and now is the nearly instantaneous flow of news today.
In 1942, when Japanese Americans were rounded up, many people east of the Rockies knew nothing about it, Tateishi said. 
At the Keiro nursing home, the thoughts of many residents turn to Arab American children.
Morikawa remembers the day after Pearl Harbor, when her teacher explained that Japanese Americans shouldn't be confused with people in Japan. "
The teacher was trying to do a good thing, but I was embarrassed," she said. 
Aiko O. King, 74, grimaced at the thought of young Arab Americans facing taunts at school. 
"I can tell how they feel," King said.
"I don't want this to happen to another innocent group.
We were guilty until proven innocent."
Only a few flights come and go.
Departing passengers accept heightened security with cheer, grateful to be on the move again.
The first plane to arrive at Los Angeles International Airport on Thursday was accompanied by tears.
The first to leave California jetted off to applause.
And so the state's network of airports creaked slowly back to life two days after terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon brought a nation and an industry to a standstill.
Private cars were banned from LAX.
Security guards checked the engine compartments of vehicles arriving at John Wayne Airport in Orange County.
Fingernail clippers and a sewing kit set off sophisticated search equipment at San Francisco International Airport.
But those lucky--and brave--enough to fly anywhere Thursday embraced precautions they would have railed against just three days ago; inconvenience had morphed suddenly into safety.
All that mattered was a chance to be on the move again, for most people, in the direction of home.
"I'm so happy to be back," said Alicia Kistler of Riverside,
her eyes welling with tears as she filed off of Alitalia Airlines Flight 622
--usually Milan to Los Angeles, this week via Calgary.
Hers was the first commercial flight to land in Los Angeles on Thursday.
It had been diverted to Canada when the hijackings began.
Kistler and her fellow waylaid travelers were back on U.S. soil, and it sure felt good.
Shouted one woman, as she passed a bank of reporters outside the Tom Bradley Terminal: "I think I'm going to kiss the ground."
The Alitalia flight arrived at 10:30 a.m.
Shortly afterward, a color guard marched through the Bradley terminal.
Around noon, a phoned-in bomb threat briefly emptied the terminal between flights.
"I'm sure this is just the first of many we'll have today," said a uniformed INS worker.
But the airport didn't spring to life until around 1 p.m., when the first flights were scheduled to depart.
Lines at ticket counters snaked out the doors as anxious passengers arrived in shuttle buses, vans and taxis.
Just waiting for a shuttle delighted Ben Parry of Lake Elsinore.
"There was a huge crowd at the parking lot.
We're just happy to be here," he said.
At San Francisco International Airport, long waits and repeated cancellations only made an awful week worse for many.
Rhonda Dennison's son-in-law is missing in the rubble of the World Trade Center, and all she wanted was a chance to join her grieving daughter in New York.
She had been booked on four different flights--all canceled.
Thursday afternoon she waited tearfully for a stand-by seat.
James Gale, 51, spent the time waiting for his flight to John F. Kennedy Airport trying to figure out how to explain what had happened to his children.
Friends back home in New York are missing.
His child's hockey rink has been transformed into a morgue.
"It's a paranoid situation," he said.
A bomb threat briefly cleared one domestic terminal in San Francisco, but at least the heightened security seemed to work, as Hal Yarbrough found out the hard way.
Yarbrough was trying to get home to Connecticut.
The best he could do was an American Airlines flight to Boston.
Security guards twice became alarmed by the 3-inch scissors in his sewing kit before they finally gave him an ultimatum: Check them or lose them.
He lost them.
Happily.
"Believe me," said the 42-year-old executive with the Lego toy company, "I have no problems with this.
"
Nobody did.
Joe Wilson of Fresno was forced to stow his needle-nose pliers in his checked baggage at LAX. "
This just shows you they are serious," he said.
"You are not going to be able to do things you used to do."
Burbank Airport opened at 11:30 a.m., but only one passenger flight departed, and only one was expected to land.
Orange County's John Wayne Airport, cozy with only 14 gates, opened at 10 a.m. Thursday, before Los Angeles, Ontario or San Francisco airports.
Spokeswoman Yolanda Perez speculated that its small size was easier for the FAA to inspect--a condition for reopening.
John Wayne normally handles nearly 300 flights a day.
On Thursday, only three landed.
Only eight left.
And airport officials described themselves as "elated."
The American Airlines ticket counter held a large bouquet topped with an American flag.
America West workers planned to go their competition one better by escorting the scheduled 1:07 p.m. flight with a parade of workers carrying a giant American flag.
Bob and Jan Robitaille and their daughter, Allie, 9, were supposed to fly out at noon Tuesday to return home to Olathe, Kan.
They were trying to wrap up a four-day mini-vacation built around the Kansas State-USC football game when their flight was canceled.
"Had we been in the air, who knows where we would be now?" said Jan Robitaille, 46.
"Who knows what would have happened to us?
It was divine intervention.
The Lord protected us."
An Atlanta-bound Delta airliner--half empty--left John Wayne shortly after noon, as airport workers waved from the taxiway at the first plane to leave California soil since Tuesday.
Its engines echoed eerily in the normally bustling runway area.
Inside the plane was just as quiet.
Silent passengers paid rapt attention to the normally ignored safety video.
A round of turbulence got no response.
Burly Delta employees traveling along were anything but chatty.
Said one: "If you want any comment you'll have to call the FBI."
But after all of the pain and all of the fear, all of the trauma and all of the waiting, for many passengers it was simply a relief to be en route anywhere.
"I feel fine," said Jim Williams from Maysville, Ky., as he rummaged through a Mickey Mouse tote bad.
"We were ready to go.
Statistically, this is still the safest way to travel."   
Times staff writers Maria L. La Ganga, Joseph Menn, Soraya Nelson, Cara Mia DiMassa, Kimi Yoshimo, Scott Martelle and Janet Wilson contributed to this story.
Tragedy: Dentists and other forensic specialists must put names to the faceless dead, which could take two years.
When the terrorists struck, the phone on Lt.
Fred Corral's desk at the Los Angeles County coroner's office began to ring.
Corral, who heads one of 10 national Disaster Mortuary Operational Response Teams, was told to put his unit on alert.
Some of the region's top forensic dentists were also called up.
Army reservists were told to pack their bags, and specialized units--such as those including search and rescue dogs--were flown East to assist in the search for what are now estimated to be 6,300 bodies trapped in the rubble of the World Trade Center.
As dozens of firefighters return from the overwhelming rescue operation, many in Corral's unit are just getting started.
They are the death squad, a volunteer team of 1,000 scientists, forensic experts and funeral specialists who descend on the scenes of the nation's worst tragedies to complete a horrible--though essential--task: putting names to the faceless dead, regardless of how little of the body remains.
"We are the people you never want to hear about," Corral said.
"No one wants to deal with death, especially this kind of death."
Corral, who runs Team 9, which covers California, Arizona, Nevada and Hawaii, said 40 specialists from his unit are assisting experts in New York, the Washington area and Pennsylvania in the gruesome task of matching bits of clothing, tattoos, teeth and fingerprints to a name.
In a program run by the federal Department of Health and Human Services, members of these teams give up their vacation time--and often take time off from work without pay--to locate and identify the bodies, and prepare them for burial.
At the World Trade Center, the job could take months.
"It's a long process," Corral said.
"They have been finding body pieces: arms, hands, limbs.
In some cases the remains are commingled, and in others they have been cremated and may never be identified."
Orange-and-white hazardous waste buckets dot the mountain of wreckage at the disaster site.
Rescue workers, many from mortuary teams, wade through the rubble, steadily filling the buckets with any trace of a survivor.
Often, what remains is minimal.
The buckets are then taken to a temporary morgue in the lobby of a nearby office building on the Hudson River.
There, workers in hospital scrubs, asbestos suits, booties and masks package the containers in body bags and send them on to be tested.
Dozens of medical and mortuary workers cram into the New York County coroner's lab, and try everything from standard tricks--fingerprints, dental records--to more exotic techniques--DNA tests--to match the remains to a missing person.
Among those who flew to New York to assist in the identification of victims were Gerald L. Vale, professor of forensic dentistry, and Joseph Anselmo, associate professor of clinical dentistry, both from the USC School of Dentistry.
Michael Bowers, a Ventura County dentist and forensics expert, plans to fly to New York next week to assist in the laborious process of identifying victims.
For 16 years, he has identified murder and accident victims, including those killed when Alaska Airlines Flight 261 crashed off Point Mugu last year, killing all 88 aboard.
Bowers, 52, said he plans to spend a week to 10 days in New York helping teams of investigators identify victims through dental X-rays, cavities, crowns and the shape of teeth.
"I'm not looking forward to it," said Bowers, who has taught forensic dentistry at the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology in Washington and the University of Texas, San Antonio.
"The families' trauma in this case will be extended.
It may take one or two years to identify everyone."
Rick McAnally, assistant chief deputy coroner for the Orange County Sheriff's Department, was flown to New York early Thursday morning to aid in the recovery and identification of victims at the World Trade Center.
"It may seem overwhelming to some, but what he's doing is basically . . .
what our job is here on a daily basis," said Bruce Lyle, the supervising deputy coroner.
"He'll be doing all the same things, but just on a larger scale."
About half a dozen Orange County sheriff's employees have been called up as well, according to department spokesman Jim Amormino.
Army reservist George Durgin, 40, got his call to active duty Sept. 13 and said his life has been a whirlwind ever since.
Durgin, who works for the forensic science services and data bureau of the Sheriff's Department, will be stationed in Washington as an intelligence analyst.
"It's just massive planning," he said.
A reservist for more than 20 years, Durgin travels to Washington for a brief period each year.
This time around, however, he could serve there from six months to two years.    
Times staff writers Monte Morin, Karima A. Haynes, David Kelly and Tina Dirmann contributed to this report.
   Litigation: Activists say the city's plan fails to address sewage, water, traffic and open space problems.
Move could affect Playa Vista and Staples Center plans.
A coalition of homeowner activists has sued Los Angeles, claiming the city's plan to accommodate 611,000 more residents by the year 2010 fails to adequately protect existing Angelenos from traffic gridlock, an attorney said Monday.
The lawsuit, filed in Los Angeles County Superior Court by the Federation of Hillside and Canyon Assns.
and the Coalition Against the Pipeline, also alleges the city has insufficient water, sewage facilities and open space to accommodate the city's projected growth.
Attorney Lawrence Teeter, who represents both groups, said the lawsuit filed late Friday contends the Citywide General Plan Framework acknowledges the city may not get the federal and state funds necessary to make transportation improvements to accommodate the projected growth.
"We are asking the city to adopt measures that will curtail development in the event that there is a funding shortfall for mitigation," Teeter said.
The lawsuit asks the court to set aside and order the revision of the framework, which provides overarching goals for accommodating growth.
The suit also seeks to cease development plans based on the framework, which Teeter said could affect such major projects as Playa Vista and construction of an entertainment and hotel project near Staples Center.
The City Council adopted the framework Aug. 8 after revising it in response to a court order stemming from a previous lawsuit filed by Teeter and his clients.
To comply with that court ruling, council members adopted a finding that the benefits of growth may outweigh the potential environmental problems if the city cannot afford improvements to accommodate the growth.
Council members also noted at the time that they are requiring a review every six months to determine if transportation and other improvements are keeping up with the growth.
"That's important to have in there," Councilman Jack Weiss said Monday.
"We can evaluate what changes we are able to make to the transportation infrastructure and then decide if any changes should be made." 
   Politics: Once bitterly divided lawmakers quickly form a united front.
But disputes are likely to reemerge soon.
A band of terrorists has achieved in war what President Bush was unable to accomplish in peace: transform the corrosive political bickering that long has dominated Washington into a display of harmony that crosses party lines.
In response to last week's assault on America, a remarkable truce has been declared between House Speaker J. Dennis Hastert (R-Ill.) and Minority Leader Richard A. Gephardt (D-Mo.).
Virtual strangers who went for years without meeting in private, the two men were so alienated that they even battled over whom to name as House chaplain.
Since the Sept. 11 attacks, however, they have conferred every day and formed a powerful alliance to give Bush much of what he has sought to deal with the crisis.
That's emblematic of how most members of Congress are acting: They are trying to bury their partisan hatchets and close ranks behind Bush, who before the terrorism had little to show for his much-touted bid to change Washington's tone.
Senate Democrats have backed away from a fight with Bush over his signature national security initiative, a missile defense system.
Members of the House Ways and Means Committee, deeply split along party lines for decades, quickly produced a bipartisan bill to provide tax relief for the families of crash victims.
And members of both parties gave Bush a rousing bipartisan ovation when he addressed a joint session of Congress Thursday night.
This wave of conciliation reflects, in part, the spirit of patriotism and unity that has swept the country.
But for the nation's political class, it has not been easy.
Bipartisanship is extremely hard work for this generation of politicians, who are being asked to break lifetime habits of mistrust and animosity toward members of the opposite party.
Lapses are inevitable.
In a recent meeting, House Majority Leader Dick Armey (R-Texas) and Senate Appropriations Committee Chairman Robert C. Byrd (D-W.Va.) revived an ugly, months-old personal dispute.
Democrats have accused some Republicans of political profiteering on a national tragedy in pushing for a capital gains tax cut that is beloved by the GOP and anathema to the Democrats.
How long will this political truce last?
Clear differences and vigorous debate are sure to surface when, months hence, Congress returns to work on issues of health care and other social programs that dominated much of its agenda before Sept. 11.
And in the weeks to come, sharp disputes may emerge over what measures are needed to keep the terrorist attack from devastating the already weak economy.
But for now, lawmakers are struggling mightily to stick together.
They are coming to grips with the reality that just as their legislative priorities have abruptly shifted to the center on war and national security, so too must their attitudes toward members of the other party.
"We're in a new world, and we have to act anew and think anew," Gephardt said Wednesday after congressional leaders met with Bush.
Earlier this week, Rep. J.C. Watts Jr. (R-Okla.) said, "It would be extremely bad for us to be having our partisan bickering over the protection of the American people."
Bickering has been practically second nature to most of those currently in Congress.
Long gone are the days when many federal legislators were backslapping members of an insiders club, when a Democratic icon like former House Speaker Thomas P. "Tip" O'Neill Jr. (D-Mass.) could be a golfing buddy of the House's top Republican, former Rep. Robert H. Michel (R-Ill.).
Most of today's lawmakers cut their political teeth in the 1980s and 1990s, years marked by escalating partisan--and at times personal--battles that increasingly polarized the two parties.
Democrats were angered when then-House Speaker Jim Wright (D-Texas) resigned in 1989 under fire from Republicans, led by Rep. Newt Gingrich (R-Ga.), then little known.
And Republicans were enraged in the late '80s when Democrats deep-sixed the nominations of Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court and former Sen. John Tower (R-Texas) to be secretary of Defense.
The antagonism grew after Gingrich rode to power on a fiercely partisan anti-government platform in the mid-'90s.
And a tsunami of hostility washed over Washington when Republicans pushed for the impeachment of President Clinton.
Even the notion of politics ending at the water's edge eroded.
The 1991 Persian Gulf War opened deep divisions in Congress; the resolution authorizing the use of force passed the Senate by a mere 52-47 vote.
But the attacks on New York City and the Pentagon were different--a direct hit on U.S. soil that drove members of both parties into one another's arms, sometimes literally.
Among the day's unusual sights on Capitol Hill was Armey, one of the House's most conservative members, draping his arm around a leading liberal, Rep. Maxine Waters (D-Los Angeles).
When congressional leaders were whisked away from their offices to a secure location, Watts was squeezed into a helicopter in the unfamiliar company of Gephardt and House Minority Whip David E. Bonior (D-Mich.).
After spending hours together in a bunker, Watts said: "I saw a side of all of us that I probably have never seen before."
Democrats and Republicans praise Hastert for a willingness to accommodate Democrats and stand up to fellow Republicans during negotiations on the $40-billion emergency funding bill for attack cleanup and national security that Congress quickly passed last week.
When Gephardt told a meeting of House Democrats that they owed a lot to the leadership of Hastert and Byrd--a senator viewed as imperious even by members of his own party--one House member quipped: "You want us to thank Hastert and Byrd?
This really must be war!"
In another example of the new coalitions, debate on how much latitude to give Bush in waging war on terrorism found liberal Rep. David R. Obey (D-Wis.) on the same side as conservative Sen. Don Nickles
(R-Okla.).
"It was like Madonna and the Mormon Tabernacle Choir singing together," said Eric Ueland, a top aide to Nickles.
Reflecting on Capitol Hill's new mood, Rep. Robert T. Matsui (D-Sacramento) said: "This doesn't mean we're going to be holding hands for six years.
Eventually we're going to have to fight the battle of the 2002 elections and sharpen our differences."
But he added, "Certainly, now is not the time." 
Taliban tales of successful strikes against U.S. warplanes escalated Saturday, as the Afghan regime claimed it had gunned down a helicopter and a jet aircraft, "maybe a B-52 carpet bomber.
" 
In recent days, the reports from the Taliban--which are one of the few windows into the warfare in Afghanistan--have evolved into wild tales of downed aircraft, dead Americans and an assassinated leader.
The increasingly fantastic accounts, consistently denied by the Pentagon, stand in sharp contrast to the relatively measured reports the Taliban issued in the early days of the 28-day-old bombing campaign. 
"Their lies are getting bigger and bigger," said a Western diplomat here in Pakistan's capital.
"If you add it up, it shows a sense of frustration that things are not going their way." 
Ahmed Rashid, a Pakistani journalist who wrote a book about the Taliban, isn't so sure.
He believes that the regime has taken to exaggeration with an eye toward boosting morale in its encampments.
U.S. bombs have shattered radio stations throughout Afghanistan.
But soldiers in the field--who traditionally regard their shortwave radios as second only to their guns--can still listen to Ambassador to Pakistan Abdul Salam Zaeef, whose speeches from Islamabad are broadcast on the BBC. 
"The ambassador is the only national voice," Rashid said.
"He knows that what he says will be listened to by every Taliban fighter on the front." 
Zaeef, a formerly obscure diplomat who has become a sort of global spokesman for the Taliban, sat on a low sofa at his home here Saturday night, a translator at his side and journalists huddled before him. 
Speaking slowly to the crowd, he told a story.
It began Saturday morning, he said, when Taliban soldiers shot an invading helicopter from the skies.
Then a warplane came looking for the wreckage, and the Taliban blasted it to the ground too. 
"It is a very huge plane," he said.
"We don't know the model or quality, but it is believed it may be a B-52." Taliban soldiers were combing the snowy field for bodies, he said. 
That night, Urdu-language newspapers hawked on the curbs of Islamabad splashed the story across their front pages as if it were indisputable fact:
more than 100 captured Americans, an opposition leader hanged, a B-52 smashed in the snow. 
But in European and U.S. wire reports, the Taliban's boast barely rated a mention.
Instead, the Western agencies carried the story of a helicopter downed by bad weather Friday and an unmanned aircraft that went missing in an unrelated crash the same day.
Pentagon officials confirmed the loss of the two aircraft but said nobody was killed. 
One war, two stories.
In some respects, the struggle between information and propaganda has succeeded in further dividing an already fractured world, in slashing a rift between Muslim readers and their non-Muslim counterparts. 
Urdu newspapers aren't the only ones to dole out Taliban reports without a trace of skepticism.
The Afghan regime's version of events gets top billing--and straight-faced treatment--in news accounts throughout the Middle East and western Asia.
And as the news gets bloodier, discontent is growing in the streets. 
Demonstrators throughout the Muslim world have been shouting disapproval of the U.S.-led attacks on Afghanistan--and particularly of the deaths of children, hospital patients and the elderly, which are featured prominently in Taliban accounts. 
The United States insists that Taliban death tolls are inflated.
But not so long ago, nobody in the U.S. government seemed particularly bothered by those exaggerations.
When the first bombs fell, U.S. officials shrugged off Taliban reports as lies.
When questioned, they'd tell reporters there wasn't enough time to respond to every statement issued by the regime. 
The indifference is long gone.
As the bombing increased this month--and the propaganda intensified--the United States and Britain showed a sudden eagerness to dispute Taliban reports.
The two nations set up 24-hour public relations offices in London and Washington and are organizing a third center in Islamabad to respond to Taliban claims. 
"The idea is to beat the time lag we're suffering from," said Mark Wentworth, spokesman for the U.S. Embassy here.
"Because of the time difference between here and the U.S. East Coast, rumors can proliferate.
That's when headlines are written." 
In the midst of Saturday's rhetorical warfare, Osama bin Laden chimed in with a videotaped statement.
Clad in military camouflage, backed by an automatic weapon, he said the United Nations is guilty of crimes against Muslims.
Afghans are not to blame for the Sept. 11 attacks on the United States, he said, and should not be punished with bombing. 
"Today, without any evidence, the United Nations is peddling resolutions in support of America against the weak who just emerged from a massive war by the Soviet Union," Bin Laden said. 
Bin Laden also issued a letter urging Pakistani Muslims to defend Islam against what he described as a Christian crusade, according to Qatar's Al Jazeera satellite television. 
And, of course, both the letter and video were widely reported.
No matter what tales the Taliban tell, journalists are loath to disregard the regime's accounts.
Information from the barren, bomb-scarred nation is scarce, and firsthand accounts of events in Talibancontrolled areas are all but unobtainable. 
The Taliban has twice rounded up a small number of foreign journalists for brief treks to bombed-out buildings.
But aside from these tours, the regime has granted few visas to reporters and has jailed those who sneaked over the border to view the warfare for themselves. 
The strict laws and forbidding terrain allow the war in Afghanistan's mountains and plains to unfold largely in private, a series of shadowy strikes amid much speculation.
In other words, prime material for propaganda. 
A case in point: In the western Pakistani city of Quetta, a media mystery is brewing over the whereabouts, well-being and doings of Hamid Karzai.
A former diplomat who fled Afghanistan when the Taliban rose to power, Karzai slipped from Quetta back into his homeland in the midst of last month's political chaos.
There, he hid out in the mountains and set about recruiting followers for an anti-Taliban rebellion.
Last week, Karzai fought a gun battle with Taliban soldiers in a province of central Afghanistan where his tribe is located. 
Everybody agrees on those details.
But what happened next depends on whom you ask--and what you read.
Urdu-language newspapers trumpeted claims that Taliban fighters had captured the activist.
Other papers ran an account of Karzai's execution at the hands of Taliban assassins.
Meanwhile, Karzai's family and political allies told reporters that he escaped the skirmish, had telephoned and sounded fine. 
"The Taliban has executed the opposition commander Hamid Karzai along with his 25 associates," blared Saturday's Daily Mashriq, an Urdu morning paper.
Karzai was alive but had been captured and was headed for execution, reported the Daily Jang, Pakistan's largest Urdu-language paper. "
The Taliban arrested Afghan leader Hamid Karzai, who is pro-King Zaher Shah, with dozens of his associates," the headline read. 
The Baluchistan Times, an English-language daily in Quetta, called Karzai's arrest a "serious blow" to U.S. efforts to overthrow the Taliban. 
The accounts were scattered, contradictory: Taliban spokesmen claimed their forces had seized 600 Kalashnikov rifles and ammunition when they captured Karzai.
The weapons had been dropped from the sky by Karzai's American allies, the Taliban said. 
Taliban sources reported that American helicopters had dropped Karzai in the remote Oruzgan province, where his tribe is located, because there was no other way he could have gotten there.
Other stories said American commandos had tried--and failed--to rescue Karzai when he came under fire from the Taliban. 
Seated in the family's Quetta guest house, Karzai's brother said the Taliban is waging a war of words as much as of guns.
In the courtyard, Karzai supporters gathered.
Many were Afghan. 
"The reason the Taliban are saying these things--like that they have captured my brother--is that they want to scare people," said Ahmed Wali Karzai.
"They are afraid that other people will be going to join him, and they are trying to prevent people from doing that." 
Indeed, the picture painted by family members was almost the opposite of that described by the Taliban.
Not only did it sound as if Karzai was unharmed, it appeared he was gaining followers and starting to secure territory. 
His brother acknowledged, however, that it is hard to refute Taliban claims.
The regime has been right before.
It was the Taliban that first announced the capture and execution late last month of Pushtun rebel commander Abdul Haq, who, like Karzai, entered Afghanistan to rally anti-Taliban support. 
"Unfortunately, what happened with the capture of Abdul Haq gave them a lot of credibility," said Ahmed Wali Karzai.
"Now it's easier to make people believe they can capture anyone." 
Later, a testament to the likelihood that Karzai is alive came from the Taliban itself.
On Saturday afternoon, a spokesman at the Afghan Consulate in Quetta, who refused to give his name, acknowledged that "Hamid is not yet arrested."
Still, he said 25 of Karzai's followers had been captured.
Like so many other pieces of the story, that information was strongly disputed by people who had talked to Karzai. 
The truth was impossible to confirm.    
Stack reported from Islamabad and Rubin from Quetta.
Times staff writer Rone Tempest in Islamabad contributed to this report.
Mexico:
In Zacatecas state, development projects are seen as key to keeping people from fleeing to U.S.
Neither the United States nor Mexico appears to want to face a central issue in the debate over immigration policy: how to develop poor rural villages and stagnant regional cities in Mexico so that would-be migrants can get decent jobs at home.
As Presidents Bush and Vicente Fox look for solutions ahead of a summit in Washington next month, most of the talk is about recognizing the reality of the endless flow of migrants.
Hardly anyone is talking about how to prevent people in Mexico's migrant-sending states from wanting to leave in the first place.
Maybe that's because such development is so difficult, and such a long-term prospect--requiring decades, not just years.
But in Zacatecas state, where whole towns have been all but emptied by migration and have grown dependent on remittances, some people don't think it's impossible.
University researchers, state officials and Zacatecan-born migrants are devising pilot projects here that aim to make local development a reality.
Several imaginative initiatives are moving forward that could make a dent--if they get adequate support.
Andres Bermudez understands better than most people the collateral damage that migration has inflicted on Mexico.
Bermudez, who left Mexico 28 years ago and made his fortune growing tomatoes in Central California, sweeps his arm out over his tidy home village and mutters: "Every one of these houses was made with dollars.
And eight out of 10 of them are empty."
Bermudez was elected mayor of the village of Jerez in central Zacatecas state in July on a single-minded platform: to create jobs so that the few young people still living here don't have to leave and so that those who have left can return.
One goal of people such as Bermudez is to think beyond the "social investment" of recent years, in which clubs of Zacatecan migrants in the United States have sent money back for community projects such as paving roads and digging wells.
The next stage is to get successful migrants to invest in entrepreneurial projects in their hometowns that create jobs and earn profits.
These could range from canneries and processing plants for the beans, chiles and peaches that the region produces to new mining projects to small textile assembly plants.
"We believe that each job we create is one less migrant who leaves," state Economic Secretary Carlos Lozano said.
"The problem is going to be solved here, not there."
Officials compare this type of economic development plan to the aid program created for Spain and Portugal when they joined the European Union to spur job creation and reduce the need for people to emigrate to richer nations.
Such a support program for Mexico was never part of the North American Free Trade Agreement, which took effect in 1994.
So the playing field was never leveled.
And migration accelerated.
Money does pour into Zacatecas from migrants in the United States--more than $1 million a day--but 95% of it is spent on food and basic survival needs rather than investment.
Wayne Cornelius, who heads both the Center for U.S.-Mexican Studies and the Center for Comparative Immigration Studies at UC San Diego, has argued for years that economic development in places such as Jerez is the only serious way to reduce illegal immigration to the United States.
"My preference, and that of the vast majority of immigration scholars, would be to focus first on creating alternatives to immigration in the sending communities, through investments, credits and infrastructure programs," he said.
"It's not a magic bullet, even if perfectly implemented, given the wage differential.
But don't seal up the border before you've made the effort to create meaningful alternatives to emigration on the Mexican side."
The easiest route for Mexico has been to exploit migration as an economic safety valve, rather than try to halt it and have to face demands from would-be migrants for work opportunities.
And the United States never summoned the political will during the NAFTA negotiations for a World War II-style Marshall Plan for Mexico.
"If the two governments had listened to people like Wayne Cornelius 20 years ago, we wouldn't be in this crisis," said Rodolfo Garcia Zamora, a professor of migration studies at the Autonomous University of Zacatecas.
Garcia Zamora's small team has joined state officials to try to make up the lost years, by leveraging migrants' remittances into productive investments.
The financing arm of the InterAmerican Development Bank is developing a $2-million pilot project that would develop 60 small investment projects in 20 towns in Zacatecas and 20 more in Guanajuato and Puebla states.
Successful migrants would be invited to invest in their home communities, assisted by state incentive packages designed to solve infrastructure shortcomings and financing costs.
Garcia Zamora challenged U.S. federal and state officials to join in exploring this long-term solution.
"The U.S. is going to put $12 million more into the militarization of the border.
Why not put just $3 million of those funds into development projects that would reduce the pressure for undocumented crossings?
" he said.
"And couldn't California help us develop more effective agricultural programs and move beyond just words?"
Although Mexico has made the issue of economic development in migrant areas one of its five points in immigration negotiations with the United States, Washington has been silent so far on the issue of development assistance.
U.S. funding for Mexican development could set off isolationist sentiment on both sides of the border--with fears of U.S. interference in domestic affairs on Mexicans' part, and a reluctance on the U.S. side to spend potentially vast funds on Mexico.
But Robert A. Pastor, an expert on U.S.-Latin American affairs at Emory University in Atlanta, said that as policymakers weigh the huge costs of unending migration, "the option of supporting a large development fund might become quite practical."
Pastor said managers of so-called maquiladora factories concentrated on the Mexican border had told him that the main obstacle to locating their plants in migrant-sending states was poor infrastructure, such as narrow, potholed roads. "
So the answer is a simple one: Invest in the infrastructure of Mexico.
If we just put together a fund that permitted $10 billion in investments a year for 10 years, the effect would be electric."
Presumably, the U.S. would foot a large part of that bill, although Fox has said the Mexican government will match certain migrant investments.
Much of the new energy for local development is being generated by Ricardo Monreal, the state's young governor from the left-of-center Democratic Revolution Party.
Monreal knows the migration issue well, and its impact on the state: From 1992 to 1997, an average of 13,500 Zacatecans resettled in the United States each year.
They came home less often, partly because of stricter border controls, and they became more organized as they grew more rooted in the United States.
Monreal campaigned in California in 1998, recognizing the political and financial influence of the migrants.
Estimates of Zacatecans in the United States range from 600,000 to 1 million.
There are 50 active Zacatecas clubs in Los Angeles alone, with 20,000 members, many of them well-established and successful.
That's a potent pool of investors.
Lozano, Monreal's economic secretary, said Zacatecas is the No. 1 producer of beans and chiles in Mexico but doesn't have one processing plant.
"We are creating financing funds for small businesses to let people develop their own businesses and root themselves here," he said.
"It would be cheaper to put money into creating jobs here than into walls on the borders to keep people out," he said.
"We want to identify constructive projects for Zacatecan migrants to invest in.
What we need is to create conditions for them to make competitive investments."
Nobuyuki Otsuka, an operations specialist for the InterAmerican bank's financing arm, the Multilateral Investment Fund, is helping craft the pilot project.
He said it is fashionable to talk about local development but that the Mexican migrant investment initiative is a rare practical example.
"The migrant really cares about his hometown," he said, "so why don't we use their interest as a driving force for local development?"
Juan Hernandez, head of a new presidential office for Mexicans abroad, is constantly drumming up commitments among migrants abroad to invest back home to create jobs.
Like a traveling salesman, Hernandez visits migrant clubs in California, Illinois, Texas and New Jersey to promote investment.
He has pushed the padrino, or godfather, project, seeking to entice the most successful migrants to invest at home.
The first such padrino, New Jersey trucking magnate Jaime Lucero, has invested in several textile factories in Puebla state, planning ultimately to employ 6,000 people.
But Garcia Zamora says the bulk of the investment projects must be more locally driven, and backed by newly successful migrants without the vast resources of people like Lucero.
These new entrepreneurs will need more help from the state with infrastructure, training and financing costs.
Like many Mexican municipalities, Jerez is more like a county than a town.
It contains 57 villages, including El Cargadero, a hamlet in an arid valley where Bermudez was born in 1950--and which gave him 1,400 votes, to just one for his opponent.
Driving a visitor along a ridge above El Cargadero, Bermudez pointed out the recently paved roads and the new street lighting, all paid for by Zacatecas clubs in the United States.
Zacatecas pioneered the "3-for-1 program," in which each dollar contributed for such projects by migrant clubs was matched with three additional dollars, one each from the federal, state and local governments.
But such projects don't create decent jobs.
Bermudez knows he needs factories and agricultural industry if he is to staunch the exodus of young men from this town of 57,000.
Already, he notes, there are another 57,000 people from Jerez living in the United States who did not find opportunities at home in years past.
"If the U.S. wants to stop migration," Bermudez said, "it can put some factories here.
" Bermudez wants textile plants and canneries for the beans, cactus fruit and peaches that grow well in Zacatecas if there's reason to plant.
He wants to put a computer in each village and network them.
He plans all sorts of projects after his inauguration Sept. 15, so that by the time the migrants come home at Christmas, "we'll get people's attention and give them a reason to come back."
An Afghan tribal leader who hoped to rally anti-Taliban forces in southern Afghanistan was in a serious fight with Taliban soldiers early today after surviving a gun battle Thursday, according to family members and associates in Quetta.
The leader, Hamid Karzai, had gone to Afghanistan to meet with tribal elders and to organize resistance to the Taliban in the southern part of the country, which is dominated by the Pushtun ethnic group, the same group to which many Taliban belong.
Karzai is also Pushtun.
The outcome of the fight is critical to the formation of a new order in Afghanistan.
If Karzai, who is well regarded by the United States, is captured by the Taliban and suffers the same fate as Abdul Haq, the anti-Taliban warlord who was killed last week, then prospects will dim further for fomenting a rebellion against the Taliban.
However, if he holds his ground and other tribal leaders rally to his cause, it could signal the beginning of a change in the political and military climate in the country.
"We cannot afford to lose another leader as we did Abdul Haq," said Khalid, an Afghan associate of another tribal leader, Gul Agha Shirzai, who is in exile in Pakistan and is also planning to enter Afghanistan to rally Taliban resistance.
Despite reports by some local news organizations that Karzai had been captured, his family members and associates, as well as the BBC, said they had reached him by satellite phone and that he was safe.
His relatives said they had talked to him early today, and a man at his home in Quetta described him as "in good health."
Karzai is a former deputy foreign minister of Afghanistan and, like several Quetta-based Afghan warlords in exile, is a supporter of the exiled king, Mohammad Zaher Shah.
According to Khalid, who spoke with Karzai on Thursday night, there had been a battle with the Taliban and four of Karzai's supporters were killed.
He said that Karzai's troops, whose numbers are unknown, claimed that they had captured 12 Taliban soldiers, but that could not be substantiated.
The fighting reportedly began in the village of Darawart.
"Four of his companions have died, but the rest have climbed to the mountain," Khalid said.
A relative in Quetta, who asked that his name not be used because of the situation, said Karzai had gone to Afghanistan about two weeks ago to meet with tribal elders in Oruzgan province, a mountainous area north of Kandahar.
He went into the country alone but since arriving had been with his tribe and meeting with elders from other tribes to build a coalition to defeat the Taliban.
Unlike Haq, who was killed within a couple of days of entering Afghanistan, Karzai had been in the country long enough to contact his old associates and begin to rally support, the relatives said.
The United States has been hoping to see some rebellion in the southern part of Afghanistan, but it has been a Taliban stronghold.
If Karzai's rebellion, which is still forming, were to succeed, it would be a boon to the Bush administration, which is trying to avoid seeming too close to the Northern Alliance forces fighting the Taliban in the north of the country.
The Northern Alliance soldiers are ethnic Tajiks, and the U.S. has wanted to avoid seeming to side with any one faction.
Instead, it has said it is pushing for a broad government that would include all groups.
As the fight continued Thursday, there were reports that four U.S. helicopters swooped in to try to save Karzai but were unable to do so, according to the Pakistan-based Afghan Islamic Press, which quoted the Afghan ambassador to Pakistan, Abdul Salam Zaeef.
The AIP also said that a Taliban source told it 25 Karzai followers were arrested, but that could not be confirmed.
Former President Clinton, who has maintained a low-key public role since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, Saturday praised the Bush administration's "measured" response to the crisis. 
Appearing with former Republican presidential candidate Bob Dole to announce a campaign to raise $100 million for a scholarship fund for children and spouses of the victims, Clinton said he is "very impressed" with President Bush's candor in preparing the American public for a long struggle. 
Dole, the former Senate majority leader who ran against Clinton in 1996 and lost, also commended the administration's "prudence and patience."
He said Bush did the right thing in ignoring recommendations--most notably from prominent conservatives--for an immediate, "feel-good" counterattack. 
"We should not intentionally bring violence to innocent civilians living in Afghanistan, but it's obvious that the president and the national security team are trying to avoid that," Clinton said. 
"I think I can speak for all Americans in saying that I have been very impressed by the fact that the Bush administration told us the truth--that these are difficult decisions; the tactical decisions are difficult," Clinton said. 
Clinton also said he "particularly appreciates" Bush's denouncing hate crimes and discrimination against Muslims and Arab Americans in the aftermath of the attacks. 
A relative newcomer to New York, Clinton has been visiting schools to help children cope with the catastrophe.
He and his wife, Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton, (D-N.Y.), also have visited families of victims and attended memorial services for those who died. 
As president, Clinton ordered cruise missile attacks in response to the 1998 bombings of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
The volleys hit training camps used by Osama bin Laden in Afghanistan and a factory in Sudan.
The factory strike was called a case of bad target selection by critics, who said the factory was a food processing plant.
But administration officials claimed they had intelligence information that it was being used to produce toxins. 
Dole, a decorated veteran who was badly wounded in World War II, said, "We have no desire to harm, kill or otherwise cause any problem for innocent victims anywhere. 
"There has been a demonstration of prudence and patience" by the Bush administration, Dole said.
"There were some urging an immediate response--do it now, make you feel good--but that was declined, fortunately.
I think now we're on the proper path." 
Still, Dole said he believes civilian casualties are probably inevitable. "
Collateral damage will probably happen--some of it you can't avoid," he said. 
The scholarship campaign, called Families of Freedom, will be administered by the Citizens' Scholarship Foundation of America, the country's largest scholarship provider. 
Foundation president William Nelsen said the goal is to provide at least $100 million in scholarships for college and other post-secondary studies to children and spouses of those killed in the attacks.
The families of foreign citizens who died would also be able to receive the aid, which would be awarded according to financial need.
More details are available at www.familiesoffreedom.org, or by calling 800-335-1102. 
Clinton expects good things to come of the program: "I predict that there will be at least a dozen children of victims of this crisis that within 25 years will have made major contributions to the public life of America," he said.
President says Afghan opposition must not 'take advantage' of U.S. attacks.
Government tries to mute backlash.
From Staff and Wire Reports ISLAMABAD, Pakistan --
Pakistani President Gen. Pervez Musharraf said today that Afghanistan's opposition force should not try to take advantage of the U.S. and British military attacks against Osama bin Laden and his allies, the ruling Taliban.
Hours before the U.S.-led attacks, Pakistan braced itself for popular backlash by putting a pro-Taliban cleric under house arrest and reshuffling key military commanders.
Musharraf, trying to mollify a population that includes pockets of strong support for Afghanistan's Taliban regime and its fundamentalist Islamic principles, said the military campaign needs to be short and targeted on Bin Laden's Al Qaeda terrorist network, which the United States believes was behind the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on New York City and the Pentagon.
"I certainly think the operation is not over," he told a nationally televised news conference today in Islamabad, the capital.
"It will carry on.
I only hope it will be short."
Musharraf stressed that the U.S.-British strikes were not on Afghan cities but on military facilities near the cities, saying the strikes were "against terrorists, terrorism, their sanctuaries and their supporters."
He said he had told President Bush and British Prime Minister Tony Blair that "this action should not be allowed to be taken advantage of by the Northern Alliance," referring to the Afghan opposition coalition fighting the Taliban.
Despite authorities' efforts to keep protests under control, thousands of people were on the street of the main market in the border city of Quetta at midmorning today, angry about the U.S. airstrikes.
Crowds burned a movie theater, and police used tear gas in an attempt to quell the mob.
On Sunday, authorities detained a virulently anti-American cleric, Maulana Fazlur Rehman, and placed him under house arrest in the frontier city of Peshawar.
Rehman is leader of the Jamiat-ul-Ulema-e-Islam party, which has staged several pro-Taliban demonstrations in the past three weeks.
On Saturday, Musharraf, who took power in a 1999 military coup, reasserted his control over the army by extending his term as chief of staff for one year.
Then, only an hour before the U.S. airstrikes were launched Sunday, he announced a reorganization of senior military commanders that stripped authority from one general known to have conservative religious views.
Gen. Mohammed Aziz Khan was moved from his powerful position as corps commander of Lahore, the capital of Punjab province, to a more ceremonial position as chairman of the joint chiefs of staff.
According to military experts, the appointment of another officer, Gen. Mohammed Yusuf, as vice chief of the army staff was designed to neutralize other conservative elements in the armed forces.
The 600,000-strong Pakistani military is considered the most powerful institution in the country.
"These were all necessary and pragmatic moves," said Lahore lawyer and author Aitezaz Ihsan.
"In the wake of the attacks on Afghanistan, there is likely to be stoking of religious sentiments.
It is not going to be easy for Pakistanis to live with the destruction of Afghanistan.
Gen. Musharraf has neutralized this reactionary mind-set.
After all, Pakistanis are not going to be watching the attacks like U.S. citizens.
They are 12,000 miles away, and we are next door."
Sharing a 1,500-mile border with Afghanistan, Pakistan finds itself in one of the most precarious positions in the region.
Until recently, it was a key backer of the Taliban regime and one of only three nations to officially recognize it as the legitimate authority in Afghanistan.
Pakistan's borderlands are predominantly populated by ethnic Pushtuns, who are also the largest ethnic group in Afghanistan.
Since the 1950s, there have been periodic movements for Pushtun independence, and Pakistan considers a stable Pushtun population key to its national security.
After the Sept. 11 attacks on the U.S., Pakistan was one of the first states contacted by American officials seeking support.
According to U.S. Ambassador Wendy Chamberlin, Musharraf agreed without hesitation to join the international coalition against terrorism.
That decision has had both political and economic costs.
Because of heightened security concerns, Pakistan's exports have dropped by more than 50%.
Most international airlines canceled flights to Pakistan.
Freight and insurance rates have soared.
In an attempt to repay Pakistan for the cost of its support, Washington has offered an array of economic concessions, including possibly forgiving the $3-billion debt that Pakistan owes the United States.
This week, Pakistani Finance Minister Shaukat Aziz is scheduled to be in Washington to discuss economic aid proposals with Treasury Secretary Paul H. O'Neill.
To show political support for Pakistan, Chamberlin shared with authorities here evidence related to the Sept. 11 attacks gathered by U.S. and European investigators.
And, in another gesture of gratitude and support, Blair traveled to Pakistan last week and met with Musharraf.
Pakistani authorities have been worried about possible assaults on Americans or citizens of U.S. allies in the event of military action against Afghanistan.
More than 60 dependents of U.S. diplomats have been evacuated from Pakistan to other countries in recent weeks.
'Pakistanis are not going to be watching the attacks like U.S. citizens.
They are 12,000 miles away, and we are next door.'
South Asia: As secretary of State begins mission to bolster the military government, India shells disputed Kashmir region.
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell arrived Monday in Pakistan with political and military offers to reinforce the government of Gen. Pervez Musharraf, including a compromise formula for a new government in neighboring Afghanistan that would allow some Taliban members to participate. 
But Powell's mission to South Asia immediately faced new obstacles as tensions erupted between Pakistan and India on two fronts in and near the long-disputed region of Kashmir, ending a 10-month cease-fire and threatening to pull the United States even deeper into the volatile region. 
India unleashed artillery, mortars and rockets across the Line of Control dividing the Himalayan region, according to Pakistani presidential spokesman Maj.
Gen. Rashid Qureshi. 
Powell's visit coincided with the arrival of a delegation representing former Afghan monarch Mohammad Zaher Shah and the representative of one faction in the Northern Alliance forces fighting the Taliban in Afghanistan. 
Over the weekend, several Pakistani newspapers reported that Taliban Foreign Minister Wakil Ahmed Mutawakel, who is considered a moderate in the context of the extreme fundamentalist regime, also secretly traveled to Islamabad to meet with senior Pakistani officials. 
Sources in the Pakistani Foreign Ministry could not confirm these reports but did not rule out the possibility that some representatives of Pakistan, the Taliban and the United States might have had meetings in Quetta, a provincial capital only a few hours' drive from the Taliban stronghold of Kandahar, Afghanistan. 
In an effort to preserve stability along its 1,500-mile border with Afghanistan, Pakistani officials have been pushing for some representation by so-called moderate Taliban elements in whatever political structure emerges if the Taliban is toppled.
As the Taliban's main envoy to the outside world, Mutawakel is often mentioned in these discussions. 
Meanwhile, Pakistani officials said one woman was killed and 36 people were injured when India shelled positions along the Line of Control near Sialkot and in Rawalakot.
India said 11 Pakistani posts were destroyed and 12 guerrillas killed along the Line of Control. 
The shelling in both areas started less than an hour before Powell landed in Islamabad.
In New Delhi, a government spokesman said the troops were not acting on government orders. 
But Qureshi dismissed claims that India was trying to block infiltrators from crossing the Line of Control in an area that has three lines of defense, including a minefield. 
"No local commanders are authorized to fire artillery--or maybe they have lost control of their artillery," he said.
"It was madness.
It's inconceivable why they would do this." 
The violence is a blow to Bush administration diplomacy.
Just before U.S. forces launched airstrikes against Afghanistan on Oct. 7, President Bush, National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice and Powell engaged in a flurry of calls to avoid any new violence on a second front in South Asia, Rice said Monday in Washington. 
Bush called on the two nations, which possess nuclear weapons, to back away from conflict. 
"It is very important that India and Pakistan stand down during our activities in Afghanistan--stand down, for that matter, forever," Bush said after meeting in the Oval Office with Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi. 
"We are mindful that activities around Kashmir could create issues in that part of the region, particularly as we're conducting our operations in Afghanistan," the president said. 
Musharraf had dinner with Powell on Monday night at U.S. Ambassador Wendy Chamberlin's official residence, a State Department official confirmed. 
Powell is scheduled to travel to India today after extensive talks with Musharraf and his Cabinet here in the Pakistani capital.
Even before the new fighting flared, the secretary said he would be discussing Kashmir with the leaders of both nations. 
"The maintenance of the Line of Control and exercise of restraint is very important," Powell said. 
Originally, the U.S. had expected Kashmir to be low on the agenda. 
Powell's primary focus on the first leg of his trip is the shoring up of the Pakistani military government, which is coming under increasing fire for its support of the U.S. war on terrorism.
In key cities, nationwide strikes called by pro-Taliban forces in Pakistan to coincide with Powell's arrival crippled business Monday by an estimated 50% to 80%. 
A new Gallup Poll also shows that while about half of respondents approve of Musharraf's performance, 81% now support the Taliban, the fundamentalist Islamic movement that rules Afghanistan. 
To assuage Pakistani fears about the regional political balance, Powell will tell Musharraf in talks today that the U.S. is prepared to accept some elements of the Taliban leadership in a new Afghan coalition government. 
"The current Taliban leadership seems to have destroyed this country effectively and would not have a serious claim to be part of the government," Powell told reporters traveling with him. "
But there are many people within the Taliban, leaders who will still be there.
They're not all leaving the country, so I hope the international community will be able to put together something that will appeal to all of the Afghan people." 
Pakistan, the only nation with formal ties to the Taliban regime, fears that a postwar Afghan government may not be as friendly to Islamabad.
With India on its eastern border and Iran to the southwest, Pakistan has long considered the Taliban its most reliable regional ally. 
The momentum is clearly building to come up with a plan for post-Taliban rule.
A senior Pakistani Foreign Ministry official here predicted that the Powell talks today will be followed by the announcement of a date for a meeting in Pakistan of an Afghan "representative body" to finalize "the future political setup.
" This would be a prelude to a loya jirga, or grand assembly, that would choose a new government, the official said. 
Powell also announced that he had appointed Richard Haass, director of policy planning at the State Department, as his special coordinator to explore with United Nations and key countries the issue of Afghanistan's future.
"We're going to work with the U.N. and others to start to develop some ideas as to what we have to do and want to do if there is a change," the secretary said. 
The Bush administration appears to be increasingly deferring to the world body on postwar issues.
Powell said the U.N. will play "a key role." 
The U.S. also is hoping to announce new exchanges with the Pakistani military, a move designed to signal long-standing American interest as well as build a new generation of Pakistani officers with significant exposure to the West. 
Formalizing an agreement to launch an international military education and training program now depends on congressional action to waive one of the restrictions imposed on Pakistan by U.S. sanctions.
The Bush administration has taken several steps to remove sanctions since Musharraf agreed to back the U.S. war on terrorism. 
Pakistan also has sought assurances that the U.S. will not abandon it again, as officials here believe happened after the decade-long Soviet occupation of Afghanistan ended in 1989. 
Powell is the highest-ranking American official to visit the region since the Sept. 11 attacks led the U.S. to mobilize a world coalition to fight terrorism, with Pakistan quickly becoming the most important front line for the first phase. 
Powell's visit was greeted with a general strike called by religious parties as well as a new round of demonstrations.
In Quetta, a center of pro-Taliban sentiment, parties opposed to Musharraf's pro-U.S. stance staged their second mass rally in four days, bringing out more than 10,000 people and raising the level of rhetoric and threats against the government. 
Attaur Rehman, younger brother of Maulana Fazlur Rehman, the leader of the Jamiat-ul-Ulema-e-Islam party, was one of three main speakers and called on Pakistan's army and other armed forces to "organize a coup" against Musharraf--branding the general a renegade to the Pakistani nation. 
On the surface, the strike was a success in Quetta.
Storekeepers had no choice but to shutter their premises or risk being vandalized.
But many managed to carry out a little business on the side, in front of their closed shops.    
Times staff writers Rone Tempest in Islamabad, John Daniszewski in Quetta and James Gerstenzang in Washington contributed to this report.
Attacks:
Studies focus on how lethal agents disperse.
Tests are run in subways, at airports.
No one challenged them as they moved among Manhattan's busy subway commuters--a group of men, carrying identification from a phony company, who tossed light bulbs that shattered on the underground tracks.
But the men who slipped onto midtown trains 35 years ago were actually U.S. germ warfare scientists, and their light bulbs contained bacteria, considered harmless, that they dispersed among thousands of New Yorkers. 
It was one of more than 200 secret tests the Army conducted in populated parts of the country from 1949 to 1969, aimed at producing data on how a biological or chemical attack might unfold. 
The studies provoked outrage when they became known in the 1970s.
But today, as some Americans stockpile gas masks and antibiotics in fear of a terrorist attack, they are also a reminder that the government has been probing the science of unconventional warfare for decades, and in substantial detail. 
In fact, the government is still conducting studies on the decades-old question of how lethal agents would disperse during an assault.
In nighttime experiments, scientists have monitored air flows in the Washington subway system, which might show how officials could move trains without making an attack worse.
Other tests have been conducted in airports, over Salt Lake City last year and in other settings with complex air flows, using smoke and other materials instead of bacteria. 
And that is only one field of science that government biological and chemical defense experts are studying.
The work extends well beyond the most obvious elements of defense, such as developing gas masks and protective gear. 
New optical equipment can determine whether a suspicious cloud miles away contains dangerous materials.
The gene revolution has led to hand-held monitors that can detect small amounts of biological or chemical agents.
Because the first signs of biological attack might appear at doctors' offices, new software is helping a small number of public health officials keep moment-by-moment tabs on the illnesses reported by patients. 
Some of these products are already available, but it will take years for many others to reach soldiers or civil defense directors.
Moreover, the nation is not always adept at using even the tools it has at hand. 
The General Accounting Office, for example, reported last week that poor inventory controls caused the Pentagon to greatly overstate the number of protective suits it had purchased to safeguard troops from biochemical attacks.
And the Virginia-based International Assn. of Fire Chiefs complains that firefighters cannot buy a new type of protective mask already on the market, because a government agency has been slow to certify the equipment as acceptable. 
"We are not prepared for a chem-bio attack in this country, and one of the main reasons for it is that the federal government has not yet certified the masks for use by firefighters and other first responders," said Alan Caldwell, government relations director for the fire chiefs' group.
"Having the mask would be a major step forward." 
But at the same time, some people familiar with government efforts believe that their broad scope should bring a measure of comfort to a nation now anxious about the threat of biological or chemical attacks. 
"We may not be where we want to be on homeland defense, but we are not starting with a blank sheet of paper," said Brig.
Gen. Dean Ertwine, commander of the U.S. Army Developmental Test Command, whose mission includes testing protective equipment. 
Many terrorism experts believe that the threat of a biological or chemical attack, at least one that would cause mass casualties, is remote.
Even if a terrorist could obtain a lethal agent, there are technical hurdles to distributing it widely. 
The secret tests of the 1950s and 1960s examined how high those hurdles are.
They studied the distance that bacteria, viruses or lethal gases spread in the atmosphere, how fast they degrade and how many casualties they might cause. 
In 1950, for example, a Navy vessel sprayed bacteria along two miles of the San Francisco coast.
Thanks to a gentle wind, the bacteria blanketed the city during one test. 
Had a similar but lethal bacteria been sprayed, more than 60% of residents would have been infected, according to William Patrick III, a former manager of Army bioweapons programs. 
But in a second test, conducted during rougher weather, scientists could find bacteria only as far as two blocks from the shore.
This demonstrated that weather conditions were as important to an attack as the agent used, Patrick wrote in a paper published this year by the National Academy of Sciences. 
In all, six tests were conducted in San Francisco, using two types of bacteria.
Other materials were sprayed over Minneapolis and St. Louis, in Washington's National Airport and elsewhere.
In the 1966 New York subway tests, air flows from the trains were shown to push bacteria widely through the subway cars and underground tunnels. 
It was an era with no computer modeling, and with less sensitivity than today to the protection of research volunteers.
Military officials did not tell local officials or Congress about the tests, and word did not leak out until the mid-1970s.
There were reports of increased illness in some of the cities involved, but military officials called them coincidental.
A federal judge dismissed one wrongful-death case in San Francisco, ruling that the bacteria release had been harmless. 
Today, scientists are still working on some of the same questions as in the secret experiments, but with a major difference.
In 1969, President Nixon halted all work on offensive biological weapons, and the nation began destroying its stockpiles.
By law, all current efforts must be aimed only at improving defenses against an attack. 
For example, scientists are still studying air flows.
The information could help them learn how to evacuate people from a subway, airport or city without spreading bacteria further, said Richard Wheeler, who manages chemical, biological and national security programs at the Department of Energy. 
One particularly complex problem involves air flows through the "urban canyons" created by tall buildings.
But understanding air movements in cities could be crucial, said Alan Zelicoff, a physician at the government's Sandia National Laboratories in Albuquerque. 
With millions of people living and working in Manhattan, N.Y., officials could not rush antibiotics to everyone if they detected a biological attack.
"You'd like to know if maybe people on the left hand of the island have no concerns, because the cloud passed over them, but that those beyond Lexington and 83rd need help," he said. 
Last fall, the Department of Energy conducted tests over Salt Lake City using a gas meant to mimic a toxic cloud, Wheeler said.
He said the city was chosen because of unique air flows in the region, and not because it will host the 2002 Winter Olympics. 
Often, new information on air flows is fed into a modeling system at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory near Oakland, which uses current weather conditions and a vast database to predict how an atmospheric release of materials is likely to travel. 
The 20-year-old system was designed to track accidental releases of radioactive material from nuclear power plants, Wheeler said.
But it is being upgraded to include a variety of data, such as how quickly various biological agents degrade in the atmosphere. 
At Dugway Proving Ground, an Army testing range in Utah, scientists have built expertise in the arcane science of aerobiology, the study of airborne organic materials. 
Dugway scientists test protective clothing, decontamination systems and equipment that detects lethal agents.
Because different spraying systems create different types of toxic clouds--from a fine mist to a heavy rain--the scientists have to know how different spray nozzles affect the way lethal agents disperse. 
But that expertise has been important for other reasons.
In the months leading up to Operation Desert Storm a decade ago, U.S. officials became aware that the Iraqi government had purchased several dozen sophisticated spraying devices from Italy.
The devices were meant for agricultural purposes, but military officials feared they could also be used to spread biological or chemical materials in the battlefield. 
It fell to scientists at Dugway and other Army programs to determine the threat from these sprayers.
According to an unclassified summary of their report, the scientists tested the equipment and developed estimates of the threat it posed to people who might be downwind. 
Some of the government work is aimed at detecting weapon programs by hostile groups. 
In early September, the Defense Department confirmed that it had built a germ fermenter in the Nevada desert using commercially available parts.
The goal, the agency said, was to study whether terrorists or other groups that tried similar projects would produce any "signatures" of their work that could be detected by U.S. intelligence-gathering. 
The Pentagon has also discussed producing a genetically altered form of anthrax to see if it would be resistant to the anthrax vaccine.
The project, which was first disclosed by the New York Times last month, came about after Russian scientists reported in 1997 that they had implanted foreign genes in anthrax, the Pentagon said.
It has been on hold amid debate on whether it violates an international treaty and U.S. laws that bar work on offensive biological weapons. 
Zelicoff, the Sandia scientist, is working on a different aspect of biowarfare defense.
He has designed a touch-screen computer program that allows doctors to record basic symptoms of patients in about 30 seconds.
The information, which includes such data as blood counts and X-ray results, is relayed electronically to public health officials, who look for unusual patterns. 
Because biological agents tend to be odorless and colorless, these illness patterns might be the first warning that a biological attack has occurred, Zelicoff said.
The system is at six hospitals now, but Zelicoff says he has government funding to put it in 150 hospitals in the next year. 
Traditionally, public health officials have had to rely on doctors to phone them with reports of unusual symptoms.
And most doctors cannot tell anthrax, for example, from a more common influenza.
But Zelicoff's Rapid Syndrome Validation Project can detect unusual patterns of symptoms, and it pages public health officials when suspicious clusters of symptoms appear.
Military:
Clinton says Afghanistan camps, chemical plant in Sudan are work of Islamic militant Osama bin Laden.
He allegedly planned more attacks on Americans.
The United States launched a series of surprise missile strikes against terrorist bases in Afghanistan and an alleged weapons facility in Sudan on Thursday, contending they had been instrumental in the Aug. 7 bombings of two U.S. embassies in East Africa and were about to become the launching points for other attacks on Americans worldwide.
The U.S. attacks, carried out with 75 to 100 Tomahawk cruise missiles launched from U.S. warships, targeted groups loyal to Osama bin Laden, a millionaire Saudi exile who intelligence officials said has sponsored other terrorist operations against Americans during the past 10 years.
President Clinton, who personally ordered the strikes, said U.S. intelligence agencies had amassed "convincing" evidence that the terrorist groups had "played the key role" in the embassy bombings.
Although it is clear that the missile strikes were, in part, an act of retaliation, officials said a major reason Washington acted so quickly was that it had evidence that Bin Laden was planning a series of terrorist operations against "very specific U.S. targets" around the world, possibly during the next several days.
Another reason the strikes were launched Thursday, officials said, was that intelligence agencies had received information that several hundred terrorist operatives, including members of Egypt's Islamic Jihad and the Gamaa al Islamiya, would be meeting at one of the bases.
Some said the facility can accommodate as many as 3,000 people.
In an interview with The Times less than 90 minutes before the missile strikes, an associate of Bin Laden read a statement from the suspected terrorist leader both denying responsibility for the embassy bombings and calling on Muslims worldwide to wage a holy war against the United States and Jews.
The message was broadcast via satellite by a Bin Laden lieutenant, Ayman Zawahiri, from "somewhere in Afghanistan."
Clinton, in a brief statement before interrupting a vacation on Martha's Vineyard, called the overall threat from Bin Laden's network "as dangerous as any we face."
He said Americans "saw its twisted mentality at work" in the embassy bombings. "
Today, we have struck back."
A few hours later, in a televised address from Washington, he recited a list of terrorist activities in which he said Bin Laden was involved: the recent U.S. embassy bombings in Kenya and Tanzania, attacks on U.S. and U.N. peacekeepers in Somalia, the killing of German tourists in Egypt, plans to bomb six U.S. 747s over the Pacific, and plots to assassinate Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and the pope.
The missile strikes, begun about 10:30 a.m. PDT, were planned and carried out with exceptional secrecy.
Even after the attacks had been completed, Pentagon officials were unusually reticent about disclosing details for fear of tipping their hand to terrorist leaders about what the United States had learned and what it may be planning.
Army Gen. Henry H. Shelton, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said the missile targets included seven training and logistics facilities in Afghanistan and a chemical complex in northeast Khartoum, the capital of Sudan.
He said the plant had been involved in producing chemical agents, including precursors for nerve gases such as VX.
Defense Secretary William S. Cohen said the Pentagon still had not obtained complete bomb-damage assessment reports, but he hinted that the damage may have been limited.
"We recognize that these strikes will not eliminate the problem," he said, "but our message is clear: There will be no sanctuary for terrorists."
Sudanese television footage of the chemical plant hit by U.S. missiles showed the facility in flames, and eyewitnesses in Khartoum said it was essentially destroyed.
Elfatih Mohammed Ahmed Erwa, Sudan's ambassador to the United Nations, contended later that the facility was a pharmaceutical plant.
He said Sudan will file a formal complaint with the U.N. Security Council.
a telephone interview after the raids that Bin Laden survived the attack.
"Osama bin Laden is safe," he said.
He also asserted that American missiles had missed their targets in the Afghan cities of Khost and Jalalabad, although there were some casualties as a result of the raids. "
The Afghan people and government will not be overawed by such attacks, and we will defend our homeland," he said.
The bases in Afghanistan contained tanks, armored personnel carriers, firing ranges, obstacle courses and large caches of explosives and specialized missiles, officials said.
One intelligence officer called it "the preeminent Sunni Muslim training facility in the world."
Officials familiar with the situation said the Clinton administration's decision to launch the attacks was based on information provided by defectors from Bin Laden's cell, including one who was recruited relatively recently.
"We've had a number of successes with this group," one U.S. source said.
They said the United States still was not sure how serious the blow to Bin Laden was.
"We're waiting to see to what extent we had good fortune in hitting the gathering of bad guys," one source said.
Although officials in both countries denied it, there was immediate speculation that the links to Bin Laden may have been discovered with the cooperation of authorities in Pakistan and Saudi Arabia, which are each close to one of the target areas.
Either government would face a substantial threat from domestic terrorist groups if any evidence of such help were disclosed.
Reaction in official Washington was mixed.
House Speaker Newt Gingrich (R-Ga.) and several key lawmakers of both parties strongly supported the president's action.
Gingrich said Clinton "did exactly the right thing," and he expressed hopes that the administration would take additional action "to ensure that . . .
our interests remain secure."
However, Sens. Arlen Specter (R-Pa.) and Dan Coats (R-Ind.)
, apparently angry because some members of Congress had not been briefed on the attacks before they were launched, raised the possibility that the move may have been timed to divert public attention from the Monica S. Lewinsky affair, much as was depicted in the recent movie "Wag the Dog."
Administration officials immediately dismissed such suggestions as ludicrous.
Cohen, briefing reporters at the Pentagon, said the "only motivation driving this action today was our absolute obligation to protect the American people from terrorist activities.
That is the sole motivation."
Both Clinton and Secretary of State Madeleine Albright took pains to assert that while Bin Laden is a Saudi exile, the U.S. missile strikes "were not aimed against Islam," which Clinton called "the faith of hundreds of millions of good, peace-loving people around the world, including the United States."
"No religion condones the murder of innocent men, women and children," he said.
Rather, Clinton insisted, "Our actions were aimed at fanatics and killers who wrap murder in the cloak of righteousness and, in so doing, profane the great religion in whose name they plan to act."
He also said Afghanistan and Sudan both had "been warned for years" that the United States wanted them to stop harboring terrorists.
The swiftness of the United States' retaliation--only two weeks after the Aug. 7 bombings--was stunning by historical standards.
A U.S. Air Force barracks in Saudi Arabia, known as Khobar Towers, was leveled by terrorists two years ago, and the administration has yet to identify those who carried out the operation.
However, senior U.S. officials said this case is different because they were able to secure more help in tracing the perpetrators of the embassy bombings and because they uncovered evidence that Bin Laden's group was planning additional, imminent attacks on Americans.
"Rarely have we come to some conclusions as fast as we did," a senior U.S. intelligence official told reporters at a briefing here."Rarely has the quality of what we collected been as high as it has been," he said.
As for its criminal investigation of the embassy bombings, the FBI still has not developed hard information linking Bin Laden to a suspect detained in Kenya, a source familiar with the investigation said.
Thus, the attack on Bin Laden-linked facilities was based not on information developed during the criminal investigation of the bombings, but on intelligence collected by the National Security Council.
Washington has reacted quickly as the intelligence about additional terrorist attacks has come in, closing other U.S. embassies and stepping up protection of U.S. citizens in other countries.
American personnel were ordered to evacuate the U.S. Embassy in Khartoum a week ago, for example.
In a reflection of concern about possible retaliation against targets inside the United States, Samuel R. "Sandy" Berger, Clinton's national security advisor, said the FBI has issued an alert to all local law enforcement officials suggesting that they exercise a "heightened degree of concern."
Albright also dismissed suggestions that the military strikes might backfire and spur radical groups into more acts of terrorism. "
While our actions are not perfect insurance against future terrorism ," she said, "inaction would be an invitation to further horror."
Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton and their daughter, Chelsea.   
Contributing to this report were Times staff writers John Daniszewski, Stanley Meisler, Ronald J. Ostrow, Judy Pasternak, Paul Richter, Jodi Wilgoren and Robin Wright in Washington; Dexter Filkins in Islamabad, Pakistan; special correspondents Rahimullah Yusefzai in Peshawar, Pakistan, and Javed Rana in Islamabad; and researcher Robin Cochran in Washington.
Stress: A disaster's impact usually dissipates from the epicenter, but the scale of the terrorist attack has affected the entire country.
In her mind, Arlene Charles can't stop hearing the walkie-talkie messages from a colleague, telling her to hurry out of the World Trade Center.
She made it--carrying a severely burned co-worker down 78 flights of stairs--but the colleague on the radio is missing, and Charles feels guilty for having escaped. 
Three thousand miles away, in Los Angeles, Joan Smith keeps finding herself in tears, even though she didn't know anyone in the towers, in the Pentagon or on the planes.
"I keep wondering what those people were thinking," she said.
"I keep wondering whether I would have jumped." 
Never before has America seen a disaster so big, or been so widely affected by its trauma.
Because of television, the terror's breadth and the sheer number of victims, this attack strikes right at the national psyche. 
Counselors from coast to coast are mobilizing to shore up the nation's mental health.
But there is no systematic way to track and treat all those who might need help, experts say, leading some to fear a quiet national crisis of body and soul. 
"All of us in the whole country are survivors," said Robert Jay Lifton, a psychiatrist and expert on survivors of terrorism.
"But because Americans, more than any other group in the world, tend to consider themselves invulnerable, we are having difficulty dealing with it.
We have no psychological place to put this, and that absence contributes to our deep confusion and our pain." 
Disaster studies have shown that those closest to the epicenter experience the strongest and longest-term reactions.
The effects diminish with distance, like ripples in a pond. 
But some experts say this disaster is different because it affects every American in some way.
Though the epicenters were New York, Pennsylvania and Virginia, the victims in the buildings and the airplanes were from all over the world. 
And the weapons used were all the more terrifying in their familiarity: jumbo jets, not missiles or bombs.
Box cutters, not machine guns or dynamite.
The perpetrators were a small number of terrorists who had lived and studied among us, not uniformed soldiers in a formal war, and that pushes the terror into another dimension. 
"It's not the same kind of diminishing ripple," said John Schorr, director of the Institute for Social Research at Stetson University in Deland, Fla.
"The ripple in New York is very high.
But the rest of the nation is also deeply affected by this. . . .
Out here in the hinterland, you really have the feeling that there's a tremendous sense of deep grieving for this.
Also fear and trepidation about what's next." 
Not only are Americans and others dealing with their immediate shock and grief, but they are also grappling with multidimensional fears. 
"The scale and scope of this is unprecedented," said Charles Figley, a trauma expert and founder of the Green Cross.
"We don't really know how to deal with it.
We are going to do things that we know have worked and multiply it." 
After the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995, which claimed 168 lives, counseling teams targeted 9,369 rescue workers, survivors and the victims' family members for immediate debriefing and 10 regular sessions.
They followed up on the bombing's anniversaries and during the trials. 
But how to handle even just those directly affected by the 6,000-plus deaths? 
"There are not enough traumatologists to help everybody," Figley said.
"Just like with physical wounds, we are going to have to do triage in terms of the people who need it the most." 
Outside of New York, counselors are telling people they are entitled to feel anxious and depressed.
At Los Angeles International Airport, therapists met with United Airlines flight attendants who were preparing to get back on airplanes. 
"They tend to minimize what they're going through, comparing it with what they think their colleagues back East are feeling," said John Sheehe, a psychiatric social worker with the Los Angeles County Department of Mental Health.
"Then they walk in a room and see their crew all suited up and they lose it." 
For most, these are normal reactions to an abnormal event.
But barring more attacks or a war, people will slowly slip from their grief into the grip of daily routines, bound mostly by a collective memory of "Where were you when?"   
Times staff writers Lee Romney, Tom Gorman, Elizabeth Mehren and Kim Murphy contributed to this story. 
College basketball: Newcomer Dupree, 17-0 run spark 68-55 USC victory over Wyoming in preseason NIT.
Trojan Coach Henry Bibby started a freshman against Wyoming.
But it wasn't guard Errick Craven of Torrance Bishop Montgomery High as expected.
Rather, Bibby tabbed 6-foot-8, 220-pound forward Nick Curtis of Oxnard High.
West Coast Conf.
: After three straight NCAA appearances, Bulldogs know they can't sneak up on anyone anymore.
Life on a college campus is leaving Westphal all smiles.
Connecticut and Tennesse are at head of pack, but neither are automatic choices.
Coming off a 9-19 season, Loyola has a ways to go to improve.
Southland Women: LMU looks to keep momentum of 21-10 season.
Jon Mills made all four of his first-half three-point shots and scored 14 points Tuesday night as Samford defeated Loyola Marymount, 72-60, in the opening round of the inaugural Guardians Classic.
: Last year's run to NCAA final eight has created a new challenge for Bibby's talented team: high expectations.
A new season begins tonight.
Henry Bibby was succinct in describing his team's objective for tonight's season opener at the Sports Arena against Wyoming in the preseason National Invitation Tournament.
Gobrecht hopes last season's experience benefits youthful team.
Rick Anderson wasn't around for Arizona's run to last season's national championship game.
He came up with the big plays Friday night that made it possible for the Wildcats to win the Coaches vs Cancer Classic with a second consecutive upset of a top 10 team.
College basketball: Bluthenthal and Clancy won't start exhibition because of absences.
Jason Gardner scored 23 points and Arizona shocked No. 2-ranked Maryland, 71-67, Thursday night in the opening round of the Coaches vs. Cancer Classic at New York's Madison Square Garden.
College basketball:
More than ever, coaches have to factor in a player's desire to leave early for NBA.
Russia: Number of bodies recovered from raised Kursk is now 52, more than officials expected to find.
Forcing their way through the disfigured carcass of the Kursk nuclear submarine, investigators Tuesday recovered seven more bodies and a farewell note written by a doomed sailor in the final moments of his life.
Search teams have pulled 52 bodies from the wreck since it was lifted from the seabed and brought to dry dock last week in the northern Russian port of Roslyakovo.
Twelve other bodies were pulled from the Kursk by divers last fall, bringing the total retrieved to 64.
The Kursk's entire 118-person crew died after two powerful explosions sent the submarine plunging to the Barents Sea floor during military exercises in August 2000.
Divers have found notes written by some of the sailors indicating that they remained alive for hours.
Another such note was found Tuesday in a bottle.
Prosecutor General Vladimir Ustinov said the note was written by Chief Warrant Officer Oleg Borisov, whose body was among those recovered last fall from the submarine's stern sections.
It was a farewell message for his family and contained no information about the disaster, Ustinov said in remarks broadcast by Russian television.
He did not reveal its contents.
Ustinov, who is in charge of the investigation of the Kursk accident, said forensic experts were working to retrieve several more bodies they had spotted.
The Russian navy initially said it expected to find no more than 40 bodies, believing that most of the sailors' remains were obliterated by the blasts, which occurred in the forward sections.
Now it appears that some of the sailors had time between the blasts to escape to the stern, said Russia's naval commander, Adm. Vladimir Kuroyedov.
Since early Monday, the navy has safely removed eight of the Kursk's 22 Granit cruise missiles, Kuroyedov said.
He said all eight were from the port side.
Officials have said the retrieval of some starboard missiles could be more difficult because one of the containers encasing them is filled with water.
Deputy Prime Minister Ilya I. Klebanov said Monday that investigators were moving closer to finding the reasons for the explosions that sank the Kursk.
Officials agree that the first blast probably came from a practice torpedo in one of the nose tubes.
But they disagree on what caused the torpedo to explode.
Most outside experts suspect an internal malfunction, but Russian officials have not ruled out a collision with a World War II mine or a Western submarine.
The torpedo section was left on the seabed out of concern that it could break off during the salvage operation.
Residents have said they fear radiation leaks and the detonation of missiles still aboard.
But officials have recorded no abnormal radiation, and the Russian navy has ruled out any detonation of the 22 cruise missiles, which have a range of 300 miles and the power to destroy an aircraft carrier.
   The terrorist attacks have helped prompt several prominent Republicans and Democrats to opt in or out of political races in 2002 while slowing fund raising to a snail's pace.
Troubled times tend to boost incumbents, and political strategists are struggling to devise new tactics and define new campaign issues that won't turn voters off as unseemly.
"We're in a politics-free zone right now," said Trent Duffy, spokesman for the Republican National Committee.
The Sept. 11 attacks played a part in the decisions by Sen. Fred Thompson, R-Tenn., to seek re-election and by Sen. Craig Thomas, R-Wyo., not to run for governor.
The new battle with terrorism also was a factor in the decision by former Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman, a Democrat, not to challenge GOP Sen. Pat Roberts in Kansas and Oregon Democratic Gov. John Kitzhaber's decision not to run against GOP Sen. Gordon Smith.
"I didn't particularly relish a partisan race when we could be losing lots of people on the battlefield," Glickman said.
Many strategists say Thompson, Thomas, Glickman and Kitzhaber all would likely have made the same decisions had the terrorists attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon not occurred.
Glickman, for example, faced long odds in any event against a popular senator in Republican-dominated Kansas.
"Politicians run based on whether they can win," said Duffy.
Each decision has an impact on the battle for control of the Senate, where Democrats have a one-vote advantage, and in the House, where Republicans have a 219-210 edge with two independents that split between each party.
Traditionally, the party in control of the White House loses seats in midterm elections.
Yet troubled times tend to help incumbents as challengers have an even tougher time getting voters to focus on their names and messages, said Ross Baker, a political science professor at Rutgers University.
"In 1916, Woodrow Wilson used the slogan, 'Never swap horses when you're crossing a stream,"' Baker said.
"People feel you need seasoned, experienced people in a crisis, not somebody who comes in and has to learn."
Overnight, the attacks brought to the forefront issues involving the military, international affairs, and homeland security that for now supersede domestic concerns such as health care, tax cuts, education and the future of Social Security.
In New Jersey's race for governor, Republican Bret Schundler and Democrat Jim McGreevey this week both highlighted anti-terrorism and security proposals.
In Virginia, GOP candidate Mark Earley has begun stressing his crime-fighting experience as attorney general in an effort to reshape his race against Democrat Mark Warner.
Some Republicans believe a new emphasis on law and order could benefit them.
Washington Sen. Patty Murray, who chairs the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, said the attacks are producing economic concerns where Democrats have the edge.
The drive to raise vast sums of political cash has also changed.
The major parties and their various financial arms halted fund-raising immediately after the attacks, although some individual fund-raisers have continued -- including a half-dozen attended by House Speaker Dennis Hastert, R-Ill.
While some organizations won't resume the money chase until mid-October or even later, the Democratic National Committee is planning West Coast events next week, said spokeswoman Jennifer Palmieri.
"We think that most of the country is resuming normal routines," she said.
"The most patriotic thing Americans can do is get more involved in politics and elections."
The way campaigns are run could also change, at least in the short term.
With Democrats lining up to support President Bush and the parties trying to work together in Congress, strategists fear that slashing negative attacks could turn off voters worried about the nation's future.
"There is a change in the political outlook -- It's no politics," said Kevin Schweers, spokesman for the House Republican Conference.
"We are definitely in an atmosphere where the traditional politics of Republican and Democrat are a much lower priority." 
United, American say they each plan to cut 20,000 jobs.
White House, Congress prepare a rescue plan.
The nation's two biggest airlines said Wednesday that they were cutting 40,000 jobs, putting more pressure on congressional leaders and White House officials rushing to craft a multibillion-dollar aid package for the industry.
The announcements by American Airlines and United Airlines --which are cutting or laying off 20,000 employees each--came as executives of the nation's carriers warned a House committee that the industry's growing cash crunch since last week's terrorist attacks will push a number of airlines into bankruptcy.
During a House Transportation Committee hearing, lawmakers from both parties expressed support for an airline industry rescue plan, which could come before the House today or Friday.
Bush administration officials and congressional leaders still were working on details of a plan Wednesday.
The Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee has scheduled a hearing on the issue today.
Since the Sept. 11 attacks, U.S. carriers have slashed their flights by about 20% and announced more than 68,000 job cuts or layoffs, and analysts predict as many as 100,000 are likely.
On Wednesday, No. 1 carrier American said it will cut at least 20,000 jobs, and United said it will lay off about the same number, or 20% of its work force.
Two American and two United jets were hijacked by terrorists and crashed into the World Trade Center twin towers, the Pentagon and into a field in Pennsylvania.
"I have declared a state of emergency at American Airlines," American Chairman and Chief Executive Donald Carty wrote in a letter to employees. "
This declaration is an official recognition that--hard as it may be to accept--our company's very survival depends on dramatic change to our operations, our schedule and, worst of all, our staffing levels."
The $600-billion airline industry is projected to post a record-breaking loss of about $7 billion for the full year--and most airlines' cash reserves are expected to run out within a month.
The proposed aid package would provide $5 billion in cash and $12.5 billion in loan guarantees.
Douglas Parker, chairman, president and CEO of America West Airlines , told the committee that several airlines are waiting to see what Congress does, "and if something can't be done, they would very likely be forced to file bankruptcy in a number of days."
A number of lawmakers and union leaders, led by Teamsters President James P. Hoffa, said any aid package should include financial relief for displaced workers.
"If we are helping the airlines survive, we should do no less for their employees," Hoffa said.
Late Wednesday, Sen. Jean Carnahan (D-Mo.) said she plans to push for $2.5 billion in aid for laid-off employees that would be used to help fund job training and extended benefits.
Bush administration officials and members of Congress have objected to calling any aid plan a "bailout," and industry executives were mindful of the semantics.
"Our proposal is only intended to stabilize the financial condition of this industry," said Delta Air Lines Chairman and CEO Leo F. Mullin.
"It is not a bailout. . . .
The need to deal with the situation is absolutely urgent."
Lawmakers also suggested that airline executives curb bonuses and other management perks before they receive federal financial aid.
Some members of Congress are considering seeking to limit executive pay.
"I strongly support providing aid to the airline industry to help them through this rough period, but I do not support signing a blank check," said Rep. Robert Menendez (D-N.J.).
"I think it's fair to ask some things in return that in the end will ultimately benefit us all, things like taking proactive responsibility for safety issues, guarantees for labor and considering limitations on executive pay and management bonuses."
"Sacrifices need to be made by all," Menendez said.
In response, Mullin said airline executives are going to pay an enormous price because their compensation is tied to performance and stock options.
Other lawmakers were careful to draw distinctions between the government bailouts of Chrysler Corp. and Lockheed Corp. in the 1970s and the airlines' current troubles. "
The crisis we face now was imposed by causes almost totally out of control of the industry," said Rep. Johnny Isakson (R-Ga.).
But even with financial aid from the government, Mullin said, "there will still be substantial layoffs."
On Tuesday, only 29% of Delta's airline seats were filled with passengers.
Airline executives said it might take a year to get back to the passenger levels that existed before the terrorist attacks.
And when that happens, the employment levels could rise again.
The carriers have not yet detailed the job cuts or layoffs, leaving employees on edge and labor leaders scrambling to keep up with the succession of announcements.
"Like everything else in the last week, the magnitude is like nothing we've ever seen. . . .
It's going to take a couple of days just to figure out how to lay off 20,000 workers," said Michael Buckley of the AFL-CIO.
A number of lawmakers said they were worried about other industries--from travel agents, hotels, rental car companies to the King Nut Co. in Solon, Ohio, which puts peanuts in the bags that are passed out on planes.
Rep. Michael K. Simpson (R-Idaho) said he wanted to know how much of the losses are due to bad business decisions made before the terrorist attacks.
"If we are bailing out bad decisions that were made prior to Sept. 11, then I have some concerns," he said.
The airlines also are pressing for a cap on their liability stemming from the use of their hijacked jets in the attacks.
Addressing this issue, Mullin told the Senate committee that unless Congress resolves the liability issue, "the massive response time and uncertainty as to the outcome of litigation will almost certainly frustrate airlines' ability to raise needed capital in the short term.
"In addition, it may well prevent airlines from purchasing necessary insurance until such time as the litigation is concluded.
And what's more, some carriers are reporting drastic increases in premiums, and other carriers fear that insurance may not be available at any price," Mullin said.
Under the industry's proposal, airlines could still be sued for deaths of airline passengers, but they want exemption from liabilityfor injuries to people and damage to property on the ground.
Many insurance companies have notified carriers of "astronomic premium increases," Mullin said, adding that these increases could approach $1 billion for the U.S. airline industry.
If a financial aid bill is approved, Mullin said the industry would be amenable to allocating funds to companies based on their size and done so under Transportation Department supervision.
Rep. James L. Oberstar (D-Minn.), the committee's top Democrat, added that the $600-billion airline industry is "teetering on the edge of an economic abyss."
He warned that if a number of airlines go bankrupt, the public would face higher fares and less service.
"A healthy commercial airline system is vital to the U.S. economy and to our national defense," Oberstar said.
Last year, Oberstar said, 1.2 million U.S. airline employees served 670 million passengers traveling 700 billion miles, carrying 25 billion ton-miles of freight.
"Aviation, at 10% of the gross domestic product, is the cornerstone upon which all other elements of our society rely for economic growth," he said. 
Times staff writer Nancy Cleeland contributed to this report.
By Associated Press PHILADELPHIA -- Larry Bowa was given a two-year contract extension by the Philadelphia Phillies on Wednesday, when he won the National League Manager of the Year award.
Bowa led the Phillies to 86 wins in his first season -- the club's first winning year since 1993 and second in 15 years.
"It was a stepping stone," Bowa said.
"But I'm not satisfied.
I want to improve.
I want to get to the World Series."
The Phillies finished second to the Atlanta Braves in the NL East.
"As indicated by the number of honors Larry has received, he did an outstanding job," Phillies general manager Ed Wade said.
"We felt he was the right guy for our situation a year ago.
It turned out to be the right move.
He's a 24-hours-a-day baseball guy who helped our players recognize how good they are."
   As American companies recovered from the latest Internet worm, the complex "Nimda" program struck companies around the world, shutting down sites in Norway, Japan and elsewhere.
The viruslike program spreads rapidly through many ways to infect computers running Microsoft's Windows operating system.
Nimda seemed to be abating in the United States early Wednesday.
The worm is still active, but many system administrators are seeing it less.
"We are still seeing some activity, but it doesn't seem to be quite as active," said Vincent Gullotto, McAfee.com's head virus researcher.
Experts implored computer users to update their antivirus software and visit Microsoft's Web site to download protective software before reading their e-mail or visiting other Web sites.
Gullotto said the worm wasn't as active in Europe or the Middle East, but more so in Asia and Australia.
However, he said there is no geographic bias programmed into the worm, and researchers still aren't sure where it came from.
Several researchers noted that the first reports of the worm came almost exactly a week after the twin terrorist attacks in Washington and New York.
But Attorney General John Ashcroft has said there is no evidence linking the worm to last week's attacks.
Web search engine company Yahoo was one of the firms infected by the Nimda, company spokesman Kevin Timmons confirmed.
The company's nonpublic corporate network has been infected, but the public Web site is not.
The malicious software program is designed to spread to people who open infected e-mail or visit an infected Web site.
The program also generates more traffic on the Web, slowing down users.
Every major antivirus company has updated software that can detect and remove Nimda.
Microsoft has provided several different updates for both Web servers and home computers on its Web site.
Major sporting sites in Norway, including the Norwegian Sports Federation site, were knocked offline Tuesday night when their Web provider was infected.
In Japan, Tsuru Credit Union spokesman Takao Ide said the bank  which is west of Tokyo -- shut down its Web site after finding it infected with the program.
After the shutdown, the bank suspended accepting account settlements and transfers of funds by customers via the Internet, Ide said.
Several other Japanese entities were suspected of being hit by the computer worm, including Yamanashi Gakuin University, the Kyodo News agency and the Chunichi newspaper.
The Swedish government was forced to quarantine some government computers after they were infected.
The worm can spread in many different ways.
It can infect Web sites running Microsoft's Internet Information Services software, like the recent "Code Red" worm did.
Once a Web site is infected, any Web user accessing it can get the worm.
Once one computer on a company network is infected, it can also travel across the network to attack others.
Together, this can cause an entire corporate network to be infected if even a single worker visits an infected Web site.
Finally, it can send itself through an e-mail attachment.
The sender address is faked, and may be a well-known address.
Researchers said they weren't sure how the address is generated.
The attachment may be named "README.EXE."
In addition to the hailstorm of junk messages slowing down Internet access around infected computers, it can overwrite critical Microsoft Windows system files, requiring a costly and time-consuming repair.
The only clues to Nimda's origin are the words "Copyright 2001 R.P.China," which indicates a possible -- but far from definite  link to China.
Also, the words "Concept virus," appear.
Researchers say the worm could have been built as a proof of concept to see how it performs.
"It's apparently a pretty effective one," Gullotto said.
Alan Paller, director of research at the Sans Institute, a computer security think tank, said Nimda is far more efficient and powerful than the "Code Red" worm, which hit in July and August.
"Each time we turn over a rock, there's another ... way it weaves itself in," Paller said.
"This one's going to be with us a long time."
Summit:
As Pacific Rim leaders condemn terror attacks, the two presidents meet but hold to stances on pact.
President Bush won a strong condemnation of the Sept. 11 attacks on the U.S. from Pacific Rim leaders meeting here Sunday, but he and Russian President Vladimir V. Putin continued their vocal disagreement over the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty, which Bush is threatening to abandon.
Bush called the treaty "dangerous," while Putin said it is "an important element of stability" in the post-Cold War era.
The two leaders met after the annual gathering of the AsiaPacific Economic Cooperation forum, an organization of 19 Pacific Rim nations plus Hong Kong and Taiwan.
The two-day summit ended with not only a counter-terrorism statement but a pledge from the participants to enhance regional cooperation against terrorism on a broad front.
They vowed to implement "faithfully and immediately" two U.N. Security Council resolutions reaffirming nations' rights to individual and collective self-defense.
Bush has cited those resolutions to justify the current U.S.-led campaign against Osama bin Laden, his followers in Afghanistan and the Taliban regime there.
Calling last month's attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon "murderous deeds," the APEC leaders agreed that such acts are "a profound threat to the peace, prosperity and security of all people, of all faiths, of all nations."
Bush and Putin, however, failed to achieve any breakthrough regarding the ABM treaty--the issue that dominated U.S.-Russian relations before terrorists wreaked havoc in New York and outside Washington.
"We've got work to do between now . . . and Washington/Crawford," Bush said, referring to his next scheduled summit with Putin, set for Nov. 12-14 in the capital and at Bush's ranch in Crawford, Texas.
Bush has ardently promoted a high-tech shield that he reiterated Sunday would protect America against missile attacks by terrorists or so-called rogue nations.
But Putin bluntly disputed Bush's dire vision.
"It would be difficult for me to agree that some terrorists will be able to capture intercontinental missiles and will be able to use them," the Russian president said at a joint news conference with Bush.
Moments earlier, Bush had argued that both the United States and Russia "must be able to defend ourselves against the new threats of the 21st century-- including long-range ballistic missiles."
"The events of September the 11th make it clearer than ever that a Cold War ABM treaty that prevents us from defending our people is outdated, and I believe dangerous," Bush said.
At another point, he said, "It was a treaty written when our nations hated each other.
We no longer hate each other."
Putin's comments on the treaty, meanwhile, differed noticeably from past statements.
After the first Bush-Putin summit in mid-June in Slovenia, he called the treaty "the cornerstone of the modern architecture of international security."
On Sunday, he put it this way:
"We believe it is an important element of stability in the world."
But Condoleezza Rice, Bush's national security advisor, cautioned reporters to avoid inferring any shift in position from Putin's words.
If Bush did withdraw from the treaty, the move probably would arouse strong opposition on Capitol Hill.
The chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Democrat Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, is among those who have said that such an action would create greater insecurity than at any time since the global nuclear buildup in the early 1960s.
So far, U.S. work on a missile defense system has stayed within the terms of the treaty.
But Rice told reporters later Sunday that Bush is moving inexorably toward withdrawing from it.
She did not specify a date but said the move could come "fairly soon."
Rice added: "We are not going to permit a program of testing and development to be constrained by a treaty that we think is outmoded.
We think the important thing here is to move forward with some urgency to really begin to explore and to have a robust testing and evaluation program."
She said Bush "made very clear that he thinks that it's going to be time to move on fairly soon."
"The driving force here is that the president believes that we are going to need to move beyond this treaty," Rice said.
Administration sources here said one of Bush's preparations for the Putin tete-a-tete involved how to present a precise ABM withdrawal deadline.
Rice would neither confirm nor deny that.
"He did not deliver a deadline," she said tersely.
In their talks, which included dinner, Bush and Putin also discussed a significant reduction in their countries' offensive nuclear missiles, although no specific numbers were mentioned, Bush said.
Rice said the president told Putin that a U.S. review on that matter is near completion and that he would soon "get back" to Putin.
"Our task is to develop parameters of such reductions and to design a reliable and verifiable method to reduce nuclear arsenals of Russia and the United States," Putin said at the news conference.
The two presidents also addressed a range of other issues, from economic cooperation and regional conflicts around the world to the counter-terrorism campaign.
This was the third Bush-Putin meeting.
They also met in Genoa, Italy, in July.
Despite their strong differences on missile defense and the ABM treaty, both presidents spoke of the growing goodwill and trust between them and said those qualities may ease the way to further understanding.
"So we always have discussions.
But our good relations does not impede this process," Putin said.
Bush added: "My administration seeks a new relationship with Russia based on cooperation and mutual interest, instead of confrontation and mutual vulnerability."
Earlier, in addressing the global crisis created by last month's attacks in the United States, the APEC leaders pledged to take financial measures to prevent the flow of funds to terrorists, including accelerated work on combating financial crimes through an APEC finance ministers' working group and increased involvement in related international standard-setting bodies.
In addition, the leaders agreed to develop a globally integrated electronic customs network to better detect and track suspected terrorists.
They also pledged to closely adhere to requirements for the security of air and maritime transportation.
"I think nobody doubts that the unprecedented carnage of the terrorists requires our united efforts, unification of the efforts of the international community to fight terrorism," Putin said afterward.
Although some Pacific Rim leaders called for a swift conclusion to the U.S.-led military campaign in Afghanistan, Bush told reporters that he was gratified by the support he received in Shanghai.
"I think I listened to probably three or four hours of discussions about our campaign against terrorism," he said.
"And there was a very strong support for our activities.
We've got universal support around the world."
After his meetings with Putin, Bush departed for Washington on Sunday night.
Politics: Resentment over campaign attack ad has lessened as activists say mayor is doing a good job.
Los Angeles Mayor James K. Hahn was due to arrive at the El Sereno Senior Center any moment.
But before the mayor walked through the door Monday morning, City Councilman Nick Pacheco issued a warning to the lively gathering of senior citizens.
"Now remember what I said," Pacheco urged.
"Just be nice."
The center, after all, lies blocks from the Eastside neighborhood where former Assembly Speaker Antonio Villaraigosa grew up.
The area overwhelmingly backed Villaraigosa for mayor, and when he lost in June, many were angry about the tough tactics Hahn used against the man who could have been the city's first Mexican American mayor in modern times.
Some accused Hahn of racism for using grainy footage of Villaraigosa and the image of a crack pipe in a television commercial about the former Assembly speaker's efforts to shorten the sentence of a drug trafficker.
On Monday, however, much of the acrimony appeared forgotten--or at least had subsided.
When the mayor arrived for his first substantial visit to the city's Eastside since taking office, he was warmly applauded.
People clamored to shake his hand and snap his picture.
In fact, as Hahn toured El Sereno Monday morning--announcing improvements to a major intersection and visiting the site of a potential new park--there was no evidence of the bitter resentment that surfaced last spring as he and Villaraigosa competed to run the city.
"I put that where it belongs: in the past," said community activist Lou Santillan.
"Most of the Eastside was in favor of Villaraigosa, but the people in the city in general chose him.
I didn't vote for him . . .
but I'm a political realist, and I have to work with those elected by the people."
The growing public acceptance of Hahn appears to be shared by some Latino leaders around the city who say the passage of time and the mayor's efforts to include them in governing and decision-making have helped assuage some of the hard feelings.
Rep. Lucille Roybal-Allard (D-Los Angeles) campaigned for Villaraigosa but since Hahn's election has worked closely with him on airport security and other issues.
"I feel people are looking forward and are actively seeking to work with him and are going to be judging him on what he is going to be doing from now on," said Roybal-Allard, noting that she has not heard complaints about the mayor from other Latino leaders.
"I'm never pleased with any kind of negative campaigning, but I think we need to look forward now, rather than look back."
Political observers said the mayor's naming of numerous Latinos to city commissions and his backing from local Latino leaders such as Pacheco and City Council President Alex Padilla have helped quiet much of the anger that lingered after the campaign.
"I think there's a collective sense among the Latino political class that . . .
you cannot govern this city without taking Latinos into consideration," said Fernando Guerra, director of the Center for the Study of Los Angeles at Loyola Marymount University. "
So Villaraigosa may have lost, but Latinos in this city didn't lose."
Obviously, the entire Latino leadership has not yet forgiven the mayor, and some community activists say privately that a large share of Villaraigosa backers are still resentful about the tenor of Hahn's campaign.
But they acknowledge that the general community sentiment toward the mayor has warmed.
The distrust of Hahn among Latinos appears to have dissipated despite the fact that he has made few public gestures to reach out to those who supported Villaraigosa.
The most significant effort came during his July 2 inauguration speech, when he praised his rival as "someone I truly respect" and carefully recited some of his address in Spanish.
At the end of the month, he attended a reception with Latino leaders sponsored by the Spanish-language television network Univision.
Since then, however, Hahn has done little, at least publicly, to woo those who supported his rival.
And he declined an invitation by the White House in early September to attend a state dinner with Mexican President Vicente Fox, a move that many political observers thought was a mistake, considering the large number of Mexican Americans who live in Los Angeles.
The Hahn administration now appears to be turning more of its focus to that constituency.
And on Monday, nearly four months into his administration, Hahn made three stops in the hilly neighborhood of El Sereno, northeast of downtown.
"I don't think I've spent enough time in any of the communities yet," Hahn said in an interview Monday.
"There's a million things to do at once, and I'm just trying to do them all."
The half-day he spent on the Eastside was a coup for Pacheco, whose support for Hahn in the campaign angered many of his constituents.
The councilman is one of the first members of the City Council to host a visit from the mayor in his district.
"In terms of the votes here on the Eastside, the mayor obviously has a lot of ground to make up, and today is one part of reaching out to the Latino community," Pacheco said.
"I really want to be there and help him to close that gap."
Hahn began the day talking with about 50 senior citizens who munched on pan dulce and shouted out comments as they sat under purple Halloween banners festooning the ceiling of the El Sereno Senior Center.
"We're celebrating, at least in my office, El Sereno Day," the mayor quipped, prompting cheers from the seniors.
Hahn listed various city efforts to improve the area, including a $5-million project to remove an old trolley overpass and help smooth traffic congestion at the intersection of Soto Street and Huntington Drive, and a push to convert a training facility owned by the Department of Water and Power into a community park.
"That's what I think government is all about: delivering those services," the mayor said.
Many said they were impressed simply by the mayor's presence.
"To have him come out to a little community like ours that's not well-known, it's really an honor," said El Sereno honorary mayor Michael Romero, so named for his volunteer efforts on behalf of the neighborhood.
Even the most loyal Villaraigosa supporters allowed that they didn't have any specific complaints about the new mayor.
"I guess he's doing all right," said Delia Cordero, 73.
"We've got to let him do his job."
Added her friend Ernie Padilla: "Now that he's in, we're going to give him all the support he deserves."
Strategy:
Bin Laden's jihad against America is ultimately aimed at the Mideast, analysts say.
Of all the mysteries surrounding the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, the most mysterious may be the most basic: What did the terrorists hope to achieve?
No one has claimed responsibility for the attacks--much less issued demands or explained what they hoped to accomplish through the destruction.
The events have been allowed to stand in silence.
But in writings and interviews over the last five years, Osama bin Laden--the attacks' suspected mastermind--has laid out political goals that extend well beyond a primal rage at America.
Indeed, those who have studied him most carefully agree that Bin Laden seems as intent on toppling Arab regimes as on weakening the United States--though he clearly sees the two goals as interconnected.
From driving U.S. troops out of Saudi Arabia to replacing authoritarian Arab governments with fundamentalist Islamic systems, Bin Laden's ambition has swelled and shifted over time.
And as his aspirations have grown, it has become more difficult for policymakers to imagine any plausible changes in U.S. policy that could cause him to call off the jihad, or holy war, he declared against America in 1996.
"For years, we thought his principal goal was to get U.S. forces off the Arabian Peninsula
and then he'd declare victory," said an intelligence specialist. "
Now . . .
the range of his goals is increasingly ambitious.
Whether he believes he can achieve all or some, it's hard to know."
At his most revolutionary, Bin Laden may dream of erasing the modern map of the Middle East.
In both of his fatwas, he has indicated that he believes the West has artificially fragmented the Islamic world "into small and little countries."
That hints that his ultimate vision is unifying the Arab world under a common political structure--a modern equivalent of the caliphate that provided an early form of Islamic government after the death of the prophet Muhammad in the 7th century.
As one U.S. government analyst put it, referring to Bin Laden's terror network: "Al Qaeda's goal, in Bin Laden's words, is 'to unite all Muslims and establish a government which follows the rule of the caliphs.' . . .
Al Qaeda's goal, therefore, is to overthrow nearly all Muslim governments, which Bin Laden views as 'corrupt,' to drive Western influence from those countries and eventually to abolish state boundaries."
U.S. analysts still have a better sense of Bin Laden's motivation than his ambition, of what started him on this path than where he believes the path might end.
His anger at the United States hardened at two turning points.
The first was the 1990 deployment of U.S. troops in his native Saudi Arabia for the Persian Gulf War; Bin Laden condemned the presence of "infidel" troops in the birthplace of Islam.
The second came in 1996 when Sudan--where he had fled after being ousted from Saudi Arabia--forced him to leave under American pressure.
Yet his anger goes only so far in explaining his actions, analysts agree.
Most believe that Bin Laden pursues terror in service of an ideology that dreams of reshaping the world map as fundamentally as Adolf Hitler or Josef Stalin hoped to more than half a century ago.
Bin Laden has fleetingly talked about the destruction and dissolution of the United States.
"We predict a black day for America and the end of the United States as United States, and it will be separate states, and will retreat from our land and collect the bodies of its sons back to America, Allah willing," he said in a 1998 interview with ABC.
But neither of the fatwas refer to such an overarching ambition.
More commonly, he has proposed more tangible, if only slightly less grandiose, short- and long-term goals.
For many years, U.S. analysts believed that Bin Laden's principal aim was to force the withdrawal of American military forces from Saudi Arabia in particular, and the Mideast more broadly.
In his 1996 fatwa, Bin Laden declared, "There is no more important duty than pushing the American enemy out of the holy land."
In this goal, he was no different from his predecessors among the Lebanese Shiite extremists who in 1983 bombed the U.S. Marine compound in Beirut, killing 241.
In interviews with Western reporters throughout the 1990s, Bin Laden never accepted blame for any specific terrorist act.
But in praising those attacks, he suggested that the aim was to make the price of remaining in Saudi Arabia unacceptably high to the U.S. government and public.
He has made clear he believes that if terrorists can impose enough pain, the United States will retreat.
In a 1997 interview with CNN, Bin Laden cited the U.S. military experiences in Vietnam and Lebanon, and particularly the U.S. retreat from Somalia in 1993, as proof of that conviction: "After a little resistance, the American troops left after achieving nothing," he said of Somalia.
"They left after claiming that they were the largest power on Earth.
They left after some resistance from powerless, poor, unarmed people whose only weapon is the belief in Allah the almighty."
Here, Bin Laden's thinking may most closely track the conventional terrorist calculation in which a militarily weaker but more committed force can expel an occupying presence by exposing an unwillingness to accept losses.
But Bin Laden's goals now seem to have broadened beyond driving the United States out of Saudi Arabia.
"At this point, for us to withdraw our bases from Saudi Arabia, that would not be enough," said James Steinberg, deputy national security advisor in the Clinton administration.
The prevailing view among U.S. experts is that Bin Laden's larger aim is to transform the Arab world itself, starting with Saudi Arabia and perhaps ultimately unifying the region under some common form of an Islamic government.
Ending U.S. support for Israel is clearly part of Bin Laden's agenda, but it is not the centerpiece, most experts agree.
"Creating an Islamic society is the fundamental point," said Nasser Hadian, a political scientist from Iran's Tehran University who is now teaching at Columbia University.
If Bin Laden's principal goal is to undermine pro-Western Arab governments, one reasonable question might be why he does not aim more of his attacks directly at those societies.
Analysts believe that Bin Laden has, in fact, helped fund Islamic opposition groups in countries such as Algeria, Yemen and Saudi Arabia.
And groups associated with his Al Qaeda network have mounted terrorist campaigns inside other Arab nations--particularly the Islamic Jihad in Egypt and the Armed Islamic Group, or GIA, in Algeria.
But the operations most directly linked to Bin Laden--ranging from the 1998 bombings of two U.S. embassies in Africa to last year's attack on the U.S. destroyer Cole and culminating with last month's airplane hijackings--have generally focused on the United States.
In his writings and interviews, he has offered several hints why.
The key is Bin Laden's belief that U.S. military support is the critical prop maintaining the existing Arab governments, particularly Saudi Arabia.
In his 1996 fatwa, he argued at great length that it would not make sense to launch a revolt against the Saudi royal family or other Arab governments until the United States has been forced from the region. "
An internal war is a great mistake, no matter what reasons are there for it," he wrote, because "the presence of the occupier forces will control the outcome of the battle for its own benefit."
In that sense, analysts believe that Bin Laden has targeted the United States largely because he believes it blocks his ultimate objective--radicalizing the Islamic nations.
As President Bush put it in his speech to Congress last month: "They stand against us because we stand in their way."
Bin Laden may also believe that targeting the United States advances his goal of transforming the Arab world because he is convinced that his attacks can widen the gulf between the two.
In effect, Bin Laden inverts Bush's declaration that the nations of the world must decide whether they stand with America or with the terrorists. "
He sees the attacks as providing radicalization of the Islamic world against the U.S.," said Stephen P. Cohen, a South Asia expert at the Brookings Institution in Washington.
In his fatwas and interviews, Bin Laden has angrily condemned the United States for civilian deaths in Iraq, Lebanon and other Arab countries.
Yet many believe that through his terror attacks, Bin Laden may be hoping to provoke an American military response that produces more civilian casualties, which he can hold as evidence of a U.S. "crusade" against Islam. "
Polarization is an explicit goal here," Steinberg said.
Beyond all his tangible, if revolutionary, ambitions, his actions also appear to be shaped by a more fundamental antagonism against U.S. international influence that may not translate into any precise political program.
In the 1997 CNN interview, Bin Laden said he would not be satisfied until the United States "desist ed from aggressive intervention against Muslims in the whole world."
"Just as he hijacks Islamic teachings, he also hijacks the symbolism of cleansing the Muslim world and restoring the ulema--the broader Islamic community," said John Esposito, chairman of the Center for Muslim-Christian Understanding at Georgetown University and author of "The Islamic Threat.
" "He's not a one-issue or a one-country person.
He constantly broadens that scope."
When airline executives went to Washington this week to beg for a multibillion-dollar rescue plan, they turned primarily to one boss to plead their case: Leo F. Mullin, Delta Air Lines ' chairman and chief executive.
Mullin responded with a calm yet resolute appeal: His industry must have the help to survive the drop in airline traffic that's followed last week's terrorist attacks; the prospects for countless related businesses--and their employees--hang in the balance.
"Airline service is the backbone of our economy," he told the House Transportation Committee, before which he appeared this week with several aviation executives but fielded most of the lawmakers' questions.
Referring to the rescue package's $5 billion in direct aid, he said: "Make no bones about it.
That $5 billion is needed right now."
That Mullin is leading the airlines' crusade is not without irony, because until four years ago he had never worked for an airline.
With a Harvard MBA, he spent most of his career as a banker at First Chicago Corp., and that background makes him ideally suited for seeking financial help as the airlines deal with their worst crisis.
As head of Atlanta-based Delta, the nation's third-largest airline, Mullin also was the logical choice to lead the airlines' cause in place of the CEOs of the two largest U.S. carriers: Donald Carty of American Airlines and its parent, AMR Corp., and James Goodwin, his peer at United Airlines and its parent, UAL Corp.
Those airlines' jets were hijacked and used in the suicide attacks, so the two executives also are having to grapple with the loss of their passengers and crews.
Mullin, 58, already is known as one of the most astute and capable airline CEOs in the business. "
He has the stature of retired American Airlines chief Robert Crandall," one of the industry's most renowned chiefs, said Ron Kuhlmann, vice president at Roberts, Roach & Associates, an aviation consulting firm in Hayward, Calif.
But Mullin "has the ability to communicate that some others don't" when it comes to gaining support for his initiatives, even though he prefers to keep a low public profile, Kuhlmann said.
Mullin also played a key role in assembling the rescue package and the financial and operating data required to persuade Congress and the Bush administration to help the carriers, according to people close to the effort.
He's also had to deal with most of the tough questions from lawmakers, who cited the industry's growing layoffs and its million-dollar executive compensation packages for giving them second thoughts about rescuing the airlines.
Delta, like its rivals, is slashing its permanent flight schedule by 20% and next week will initiate job cuts because there is "absolutely no alternative," Delta President Frederick Reid told workers Thursday.
Delta "will do the best we can" for its furloughed workers, Mullin told the House committee.
As for industry executives' pay, he noted that most of their compensation reflects bonuses based on the airlines' profits or their exercise of options tied to the airlines' stock prices, and that both the profits and the stocks have tumbled.
Delta Air Lines itself was in considerable pain in 1997 when it dumped its chief executive and, for the first time in the airline's history, reached outside its headquarters for a CEO and hired Mullin.
The airline had seen its once-glittering service erode, and employees' morale was sinking in the face of massive cost-cutting by Mullin's predecessor, Robert Allen.
Though Allen had restored Delta's profitability after huge losses in the early 1990s, Delta's earnings and revenue growth began to languish again before Mullin arrived.
Mullin, in fact, was one of a breed of new managers who came to the airlines in the 1990s with a renewed focus on increasing profit, not just gaining market share at any cost.
Known as a brainy yet engaging and personable executive, Mullin started his career as a partner with management consulting firm McKinsey & Co.
Then he spent five years as chief strategist at Conrail, where he was credited with helping the railroad turn from a loss to a profit.
He moved to First Chicago in 1981 and eventually became president and chief operating officer.
But Mullin lost his chance at the top job when First Chicago was acquired by NBD Corp. in 1995.
So Mullin became vice chairman of Chicago-based Commonwealth Edison (now part of Exelon Corp.), where he stayed until Delta called.
Workplace:
Those who are often first to handle Capitol mail take precautions.
But amid concerns, they say, there is no panic. 
The nation's anthrax scare came home in a personal way Monday to an already jittery Capitol Hill.
The office manager for Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.) bought latex gloves and surgical masks, and Jeff Salassa, an intern who opens mail for a Michigan congressman, was so nervous that he went to a clinic to be tested for anthrax.
Meanwhile, Brian Kennedy, an aide to Rep. George Radanovich (R-Mariposa) called his mother in New Jersey to reassure her that there was no reason for him to go home.
"'We're not freaking out, but we are a little nervous of course," said an aide to a California lawmaker who asked not to be named.
Congressional staffers were directed to stop opening mail after an anthrax-contaminated letter turned up in the office of Sen. Tom Daschle (D-S.D.).
In the Hart Senate Office Building, where Daschle's office is located, word of the anthrax incident left senators and their staffs shaken.
Returning from lunch, Susan MacDonald, an aide to the Senate Commerce Committee, found herself stranded outside the building as District of Columbia firefighters sealed off the entrance on Constitution Avenue.
"It's scary, very scary," MacDonald said.
"You hear these things, you read about them, and now it's in our workplace."
But after a few minutes, the firetrucks left and the building reopened.
And aside from the quarantine of Daschle's suite on the fifth and sixth floors, the workday appeared to unfold more or less as usual.
The Senate floor was strangely calm as Daschle related the incident in a short speech.
The handful of senators present listened attentively but without evident alarm.
Sen. Frank H. Murkowski (R-Alaska), in fact, stood up after the majority leader spoke to announce that he, too, had received a suspicious delivery in his office that day.
His staff had called the Capitol police to report the incident and been told that 11 other similar calls had come in that day from both the House and Senate.
Having dispensed that news, Murkowski then launched into a speech in favor of drilling for oil in an Alaskan wildlife refuge.
The senator's staff was later told the envelope and its contents were harmless.
Lawmakers made it clear that they were determined to go about their business.
Sen. Christopher S. "Kit" Bond (R-Mo.)
issued a statement urging that everyone "keep your cool."
"The terrorists want to scare us," he said.
"They can only win if we give in to the fear."
Outside Daschle's chamber, Sen. Bill Frist (R-Tenn.) told reporters: "Anxiety here is up; vigilance is high.
No panic."
Feinstein shook her head in disbelief at the prospect of her staff's using gloves and masks to open the 22,000 pieces of mail received each week.
"We never thought we'd be here," she said.
Anxieties were already running high under the Capitol dome, believed to have been the target of the hijacked plane that crashed in a Pennsylvania field on Sept. 11.
Down the hall from Daschle's office, Sarah Berk, an aide to Sen. Larry Craig (R-Idaho), said that she felt reassured by the "quick and thorough response" of authorities.
But, she added, "One can't help but want to be tested."
"It's a little unnerving," Kennedy, the Radanovich aide, said.
But, he added, "I sense no panic."
Sen. John Kerry (D-Mass.) called about 40 staff members into his office to urge them to remain calm.
Monday's events "ought to be a reminder that coming to work here is now even more an act of defiance and patriotism," Kerry told staffers, said aide David Wade.
Since security briefings last week, many staffs were already changing their mail-handling protocol.
Like a lot of staffers, Berk was on the phone.
She called her mother in South Carolina. "
Every time we get evacuated, I call her," she said, adding that her parents were handling the latest news calmly.
Diane Benjamin, a Senate cafeteria cashier, said she saw a lot of nervous people. "
But I do believe in the Lord, so I try to leave everything in his hands."
Even though mail was halted, UPS delivery man Steve Hilley was making the rounds in Hart on Monday afternoon.
Hilley said some offices were accepting his packages and some weren't.
But he wasn't fazed.
"I'm not going to live my life in fear because of cowards," he said. 
Times staff writer Marisa Schultz contributed to this report.
Ronald Reagan was going to "squeeze and cut and trim until we reduce the cost of government.
" That's what he promised when he was sworn in as governor.
There has been much punditry about Gov. Gray Davis' paddling this week.
Navigating through 958 bill signings and 170 vetoes before Monday's deadline, on which side was Davis paddling his canoe?
David Freeman, who heads the state's new public power authority, has a nightmarish vision of terrorists blowing a big hole through California's electrical system.
Perhaps smashing a key power line tower.
A major generator.
Worst of all, a nuclear plant.
Nobody is going to accuse Gov. Gray Davis of grandstanding for staging Tuesday's event at the state Capitol.
Nor should anyone.
Confused about what's happening with electricity?
You're not alone.
Most legislators have been confused for months.
Actually, years.
Political guru Richie Ross advises legislators to run if they see any bill that looks like a utility bailout.
Don't touch it even if the house leader begs or the governor berates.
"We're going to get it done," Gov. Gray Davis pledges.
"We will find a way.
One way or the other, we'll get it done."
Every time somebody flips a switch and a room lights up, Gov. Gray Davis' reelection prospects get a little brighter.
Republican chances of booting him grow dimmer.
After anxiously awaiting the United States' response to the terrorist attacks that killed thousands in New York, Washington and Pennsylvania Sept. 11, the world got its answer Sunday.
Following almost a month of building an international coalition for an appropriate diplomatic, political and economic response, the United States added the necessary airstrikes against what it described as military and terrorist camp targets in Afghanistan.
It was a step no one relished.
It had to be done.
The strikes were aimed against the prime suspect in the attack, Osama bin Laden, his Al Qaeda organization and Afghanistan's Taliban regime.
In announcing attacks directed at military facilities and terrorist camps, President Bush again sounded the need for patience and the expectation of a long campaign.
It will not be easy to root out foes who he said can "burrow deeper into caves" to escape bombs and missiles.
But with enough intelligence information, proper military tactics and persistence, it can be done.
The United States received welcome military help from its main ally, Britain.
Prime Minister Tony Blair had pronounced the evidence that Bin Laden's group was responsible for the Sept. 11 attacks persuasive.
Pakistan agreed with that judgment, adding a needed Muslim voice.
Bin Laden, in a chilling statement videotaped before Sunday's retaliatory attacks but broadcast afterward, tried to portray the fight as one between Muslims and American "infidels" and "apostates."
He said God carried out the Sept. 11 carnage and there would be no peace until the U.S. withdrew from Saudi Arabia, site of the holiest shrines in Islam, and stopped backing Israel.
Bin Laden's rationalization for mass murder was virtually an admission of his culpability.
The United States also announced airdrops of food, medicine and supplies to Afghanistan, devastated by more than 20 years of warfare and four years of drought.
That vital humanitarian mission underscores that the war is against terror, not a people, a nation or a religion.
The coalition will have to battle constantly against Bin Laden's perversion of Islam, recognizing that his false proclamation of himself as a defender of Palestine may resonate among Muslim foes of Israel.
The thorniest part of maintaining a coalition will be the internal pressures of key nations.
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's intemperate criticism of the United States' "appeasement" of Arab states probably was made to mollify his country's right wing.
And the initial public silence from Arab states after Sunday's attack surely had more to do with not wanting to stir up their own radicals than with denunciation of the targeted military strikes.
President Bush has said repeatedly that this conflict is not against the Afghan people or the nearly 1 billion Muslims in the world but against terror.
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld noted U.S. support for Muslim populations in Somalia, Bosnia, Kuwait, northern Iraq and Kosovo.
Those themes require repetition in the hard days ahead.
CNN said Tuesday it has submitted six questions to an intermediary claiming to represent Osama bin Laden, after being approached late last week with the idea through Al Jazeera.
The Qatar-based pan-Arab television network has been used in the past as a conduit for Bin Laden's statements. 
The cable news network added, however, that it did not plan to air the videotaped answers from the suspected terrorist mastermind in their entirety, if indeed a tape is returned. 
The network took pains to say that it had agreed to no conditions from anyone, including whether it would even use the answers in any form at all.
And CNN said it had no idea where Bin Laden is or how the questions and tape will be exchanged. 
A CNN spokeswoman declined to comment on whether it had alerted the White House to the negotiations or the possible interview. 
Last week, the White House asked all the TV networks to consider not airing messages from Bin Laden and his Al Qaeda organization in full because they were propaganda and might carry embedded messages to Bin Laden followers.
The networks agreed to screen all such videos before deciding what and how much to air. 
Anchor Wolf Blitzer said on CNN: "By submitting our questions, we are making no commitment to air Bin Laden's response.
We will look at the tape, if there is a tape, and decide how much or how little to run." 
The network also promised to immediately share any video answers with its competitors.
That is a policy reversal from last week when U.S. airstrikes in Afghanistan started and CNN attempted to maintain a six-hour exclusive on pictures coming out of Kabul from Al Jazeera, with which CNN has a video-sharing arrangement.
Other TV news organizations disregarded CNN's embargo, citing the pictures' newsworthiness. 
On the possibility of a Bin Laden interview, CNN's competitors took a wait-and-see attitude. 
"We welcome the fact that they would share it and we'll look at it and make an evaluation," said a CBS News spokeswoman. 
NBC and ABC said they would discuss airing it.
Fox News Channel said it doesn't know enough about the situation to comment. 
Representatives for the other TV news organizations said they did not believe their reporters had received similar approaches from Al Qaeda. 
Among the questions submitted to Bin Laden, CNN said, is a request for details on his role in the Sept. 11 attacks and subsequent "anthrax attacks" in the U.S.
In addition, CNN asked Bin Laden to explain how he and his followers can advocate killing innocent people and how they respond to criticism from other Muslim and Arab leaders. 
It also asked whether any of the Sept. 11 hijackers or accomplices receive Al Qaeda financial support or training, whether any other government or organization was involved, whether Bin Laden and his followers have weapons of mass destruction and if so, whether they plan to use them. 
The network said it has no idea when it might hear back.
Security:
Governor wants to determine if the plane offered by a campaign contributor is the best deal available, and if a private aircraft is necessary at all.
Gov. Gray Davis' administration is reconsidering plans to lease a $9-million personal jet to fly him around, California Highway Patrol Commissioner D.O. "Spike" Helmick said Monday.
Helmick, who is charged with protecting the governor and legislators, said he suggested immediately after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks that Davis acquire a two-engine plane to bolster security.
State officials moved quickly to find a suitable aircraft and were expected to sign a lease contract this week.
Helmick said the Davis administration now wants to take time to consider whether the Cessna Excel airplane in question is the best deal available--and whether a private plane is needed at all.
"Everything has been put on hold," Helmick said.
"I think it's being reevaluated.
The governor and his staff have asked for it to be reevaluated."
Though 41 states use private aircraft to zip their governors around, gubernatorial airplanes have long been a controversial issue in California--and the deal the Davis administration was weighing was bound to continue the tradition.
The $80,000-a-month contract, which included a discount on fuel and free hangar space, was not the result of formal competitive bidding.
Instead, it was offered by a firm owned by Stephen Beneto, a trucking company executive who is one of the governor's largest campaign contributors.
The CHP settled on the deal with Beneto Jet Sales after contacting five airplane companies and outlining the expected security and performance standards.
Helmick said Monday the Davis administration may now want to seek offers from a broader set of companies if it decides to lease a plane.
The governor's office declined to discuss the issue Monday, referring all calls to Helmick.
But one state source, who requested anonymity, said administration officials were concerned that the timing of the plane contract made it appear that the governor was trying to capitalize on the terrorist attacks to get something he wanted.
There also is concern about the message Davis would be sending to the public by abandoning commercial flights in favor of private transport.
Former President Bill Clinton said last weekend that he planned to book several commercial flights in coming weeks as a show of support for the nation's airlines, which are in financial straits since the terrorist strikes.
Past California governors have enjoyed personal air transportation.
Gov. Pat Brown was fond of his Convair 340 propeller plane, which he nicknamed the Grizzly.
Ronald Reagan, who succeeded Brown as governor in 1967, avoided the personal plane for a while but eventually acquired a small jet.
Gov. Jerry Brown then refused to extend the Reagan lease and did away with planes altogether 25 years ago, saying they were too extravagant for his "era of limits" administration.
As a result, Davis' decision to consider bringing back the personal plane could become political fodder for his Republican opponents as he seeks reelection next year.
"Given the fact that Gray Davis has taken us from extraordinary surpluses to massive budget deficits, we think it is not the time to talk about a personal airplane for him," said Beth Miller, a spokeswoman for gubernatorial candidate and Secretary of State Bill Jones.
With families everywhere having to tighten their budgets because of the economic downturn, Davis should do the same, Miller said.
Jones, a licensed pilot, sometimes flies a small Cessna to events around the state but usually flies Southwest or United.
But other potential rivals were not so eager to criticize the idea.
Investment banker Bill Simon Jr. has been using commercial flights to get around the state but probably will use a personal plane as the campaign heats up, his advisors said, and he supports Davis doing the same as part of his office duties.
"We have no problem with the governor having a plane to conduct official business," said Simon spokesman Bob Taylor.
"These are difficult times we are living in.
It's entirely appropriate."
And former Los Angeles Mayor Richard Riordan, the other GOP hopeful, is not going to second-guess Davis' choice of transport, said spokeswoman Carolina Guevara.
But while Riordan has been known to fly private jets on occasion, he prefers to travel with the public and on the cheap.
"He likes to fly coach.
Unfortunately, I can attest to this," Guevara said.
"He loves to be in coach because he gets a chance to talk to people.
He doesn't see the need to fly any other way."
Relief: Canoga Park man is heading to the region with medical supplies for refugees.
He hopes to find uncle hurt in attack that killed rebel leader.
Rice, dried beans, cooking oil.
Abul Fazel Khalili says those donated provisions can mean survival for Afghans who have endured decades of civil war, a devastating drought, the Taliban and now possible military strikes by the United States.
Afghanistan Relief, Khalili's Canoga Park-based assistance group, has tapped the local Afghan community for three years, holding concerts and other fund-raisers to help refugees.
On Friday, Khalili arrived in Uzbekistan, the former Soviet republic that borders Afghanistan, on a trip to ensure that an August shipment of medical supplies reaches refugee camps in Afghanistan's northernmost region.
Attacks by U.S. forces will not keep him away from Afghanistan, said Khalili, 45, who was born in Kabul.
He said he has made eight trips to Afghanistan since 1998, the last in June, and they were all dangerous.
"The only reason that takes me to Afghanistan is the innocent people," said Khalili, who lives with his wife and two daughters in Canoga Park.
"That is my life."
On this trip, Khalili plans to enter Afghanistan from the north, escorting a truck carrying a 40-foot container of donated medical supplies.
Corrupt customs officials there are eager to hijack such cargo, he said.
The fighting between the ruling Taliban and rebel forces may also flare up.
Khalili's contacts in Afghanistan are crucial to making the delivery, said Edward Artis, whose humanitarian group, Knightsbridge International, has shipped food, medical supplies and artificial limbs to some of the world's other war-torn areas, including Rwanda, Cambodia and Chechnya.
Over the years, Knightsbridge has donated $300,000 in medical supplies to Khalili's all-volunteer group.
The current $250,000 shipment includes 81 boxes of sutures, anesthetics, syringes and other supplies.
Artis said he hopes to meet up with Khalili in Afghanistan by Saturday.
"He's like our UPS guy," Artis said.
"We will risk our lives to stand side-by-side with him in Afghanistan."
The Bush administration has indicated that Afghanistan could be the target of military strikes.
Khalili, an unemployed parking lot manager, said he opposes the Taliban and its harsh interpretation of Islam and blames the regime for worsening the country's hunger.
A United Nations study found a three-year drought has put 4 million Afghans in danger of starvation.
The U.N. World Food Programme had been feeding 3.8 million residents in Afghanistan until the attacks on the U.S., said spokeswoman Abby Spring.
Since then, only 1 million people in the country have received food because U.N. workers are hampered by lack of trucks, fuel and ground communication.
"With an early and harsh winter expected in November, we need to be as prepared as possible to provide shelter, food, medicine and clean drinking water to an expected 7.5 million in need," Spring said Friday.
Khalili said he supports the Northern Alliance, the opposition force fighting the Taliban, but he does not distribute supplies to soldiers.
Haron Amin, a spokesman for the Northern Alliance, which holds Afghanistan's United Nations seat, said the alliance provides Khalili security when he enters territory it controls, but it does not receive assistance from Khalili.
Khalili said he will also try to reach his uncle, who was an aide to assassinated Northern Alliance leader Ahmed Shah Masoud.
Khalili fears his uncle, Masoud Khalili, was gravely wounded during the suicide bombing that killed Masoud shortly before the attacks on the U.S."At the hospital, his wife was crying and said to come visit," Khalili said.
"He is in Tajikistan, that was the last report.
He was very close to me."
Khalili, a slight, dark-haired man, is a U.S. citizen and has lived here for 15 years.
Before his departure he sat quietly at a Northridge Afghan restaurant, nibbling on a custard sweet as he told of founding Afghanistan Relief in 1998 to help victims of a magnitude 6.9 earthquake in the province of Takhar, the village of Rostaq and other areas.
On his last trip to Afghanistan in June, he bought $11,000 of food in the border areas of the country for refugee camps.
Afghan college students at three University of California campuses raised about $8,000 for that project, he said.
The camp at Dashtak, north of Kabul, was overflowing with 200,000 refugees in June, he said.
That means the 40-foot container of medical supplies he is shepherding will have a limited impact.
"It is nothing," he said.
"But we have to do something."
Probe: Syrian-born businessman named on U.S. list says allegations against him are false.
But he admits he once did a favor for an alleged Bin Laden lieutenant. 
A Syrian-born businessman who appears on the White House list of 27 alleged bankrollers of terrorism insisted Tuesday he had never met any of the Sept. 11 suicide hijackers and had not even heard of Osama bin Laden in 1995 when he entered into a short-lived business deal with a suspected Bin Laden aide. 
Mamoun Darkazanli, a slight 40-year-old who has lived here in a two-room apartment with his wife for nearly 20 years and ekes out a living selling lamps and housewares, said in an interview in his tiny kitchen that the accusations are "completely false." 
But the naturalized German citizen conceded he co-signed a Deutsche Bank account in 1995 as a favor for Mamdouh Mahmud Salim, allegedly one of Bin Laden's lieutenants.
Salim was arrested in Bavaria in 1998 and extradited to the United States to be tried for the U.S. embassy bombings in Africa earlier that year.
A Sudanese, Salim allegedly stabbed a New York prison guard in an escape attempt last November. 
Darkazanli also said he recognized Marwan Al-Shehhi, one of the hijackers aboard the second plane that crashed into the World Trade Center, from pictures beamed around the world.
He said both men attended the same mosque in Steindamm street every Friday.
But he said he had never talked to Al-Shehhi. 
"All of this is completely false," Darkazanli said of U.S. claims that he is one of the financial lifelines for terrorism.
"If this were true, the police would long ago have arrested me." 
He also denied claims by Der Spiegel magazine that he formed the link between Bin Laden and the Hamburg terrorist cell that plotted the U.S. attacks. 
Hamburg Police Chief Olaf Scholz confirmed that Darkazanli is under surveillance, but said authorities have no evidence of any crime. 
Some information provided by U.S. authorities proved to be nearly five years out of date. 
President Bush's executive order freezing the worldwide assets of the 27 named individuals and organizations listed Darkazanli's company as an import-export electronics firm on Hamburg's central Lange Reihe street, premises he vacated in January 1997 because the building was being renovated.
The telephone number provided by Washington had been out of service for years. 
German investigators have not issued an arrest warrant for Darkazanli because "we have no evidence on which to base this," Scholz said.
"If the Americans have such evidence, they haven't given it to us." 
A U.S. official said the Bush administration was satisfied with the evidence linking Darkazanli's company to Bin Laden.
The official, who requested anonymity as a matter of policy, refused to detail any of the evidence, however. 
"Nobody has disputed the fact that that trading company is involved in legitimate business," the official said.
"But at the same time, there is certainly reason to believe and evidence pointing to the fact that they have engaged in other activities to support Bin Laden and Al Qaeda."
Bin Laden's organization is known as Al Qaeda, or "the base.
" 
David Aufhauser, general counsel at the U.S. Treasury Department, said that even unwitting involvement with terrorists may have been enough to earn a slot on the U.S. list. 
Scholz was coy when asked if he was confident that his U.S. partners in the investigation were providing all the intelligence they have. 
"The problem with not getting all the information is that you never know what you aren't being told," he said. 
Asked if Germany was complying with Bush's order to freeze the assets, Scholz replied with a hint of sarcasm: "American laws are different from ours.
We have no laws that can order the rest of the world how to behave." 
A spokeswoman for Deutsche Bank declined to confirm whether any specific accounts had been frozen in response to Bush's edict. 
"What I can say is that we are, of course, closely cooperating with the German and the American investigation authorities," said Daniela Elvers in Frankfurt. 
Darkazanli proclaimed himself "ruined." 
"Who will want to do business with me now?" he demanded.
But he added that he did not feel remorse for helping Salim.
"I only ask myself if what I'm being asked is legal, not whether the person asking might one day be accused of terrorism." 
Darkazanli's former shop on Lange Reihe was where Salim showed up in early 1995, saying he'd been steered there by mutual business contacts for help in cutting the red tape of starting a Sudanese radio station. 
Darkazanli said the only trail tying him to Bin Laden is the March 6, 1995, bank signature card.
He noted investigators should be able to easily verify that no more than a few hundred dollars ever passed through the account. 
"Salim was sent to my shop by friends of friends--that's how business is done when you are trying to set up something in a foreign country," said Darkazanli, whose German citizenship eased the bureaucracy that foreigners usually endure when they set up bank accounts in this country.
"I only met him twice--the first time when we opened the account and the second time two or three months later when he decided not to go ahead with the project and paid me 500 marks $230 for my trouble." 
Salim is suspected of setting up Bin Laden's global financial network in the mid-1990s.
Darkazanli said he had had no further communication with the Sudanese in six years and heard nothing about him until his arrest near Munich three years ago. 
"At the time we opened the account, I had never even heard the name of Osama bin Laden.
Who had?" says the trader, who wears a short beard and wire-rimmed glasses. 
Darkazanli also denied any involvement in another transaction reported by Der Spiegel as having been connected with Bin Laden--the 1994 purchase of a boat that the magazine said was delivered to the terrorist group through a third party. 
Hamburg is a center of the investigation of the Sept. 11 attacks because several of the suspected terrorists lived here and attended school before moving to the United States.
German police are seeking two other people on international arrest warrants. 
German police investigating the terrorist strikes are following the money trail, including possible drug-trade financing and market manipulation, Scholz said.
He implied that nothing damning had yet come to investigators' attention.
But he said they had access to whatever they needed despite Germany's relatively strict privacy laws. 
Darkazanli has been under police observation "for some time," Scholz said. 
Police searched his apartment before dawn on Sept. 13, but found nothing, the businessman said.
His wife has since been staying with friends, he said. 
Eva Zinnius, an upstairs neighbor, said Darkazanli's wife told her that "this is all a huge mistake" and that she would be returning once the invasive storm had blown over. 
Zinnius, a longtime neighbor in the pleasant Uhlenhorst neighborhood, said the couple were kind and never caused any trouble. 
Scholz, the police chief, said he doubted those responsible for the deadly crashes in New York, Virginia and Pennsylvania came here with evil intentions and waited years for their specific missions. 
"I don't think they came here prepared to become terrorists.
I think they learned this here," he said. 
Although the U.S. attacks have prompted Hamburg and other jurisdictions to launch massive profiling efforts to identify potential terrorists, Scholz insisted that respect for civil liberties remains a priority and that German police want to avoid stigmatizing Arabs or Muslims. 
"We have to remember that 99.999% of Muslims in our country are good citizens, and it would be disastrous if the outcome of this political debate is suspicion of all these people," the chief said.    
Times staff writer Bob Drogin in Washington contributed to this report.
Politics:
A two-day conference to begin today will attempt to help establish a post-Taliban ruling council.
Hoping to patch up bitter differences born of two decades of war, several hundred Afghan leaders representing exiled political groups, monarchists and anti-Taliban forces have gathered in this frontier city to discuss the creation of an alternative government for Afghanistan. 
The two-day Assembly for Peace and National Unity in Afghanistan, scheduled to begin today, is the first in a series of such gatherings here, inside Afghanistan and possibly in Turkey over the next few weeks aimed at producing a ruling council, or loya jirga, acceptable to the Afghan people. 
"This meeting will be a milestone for the future course of Afghanistan--a very noble event," said Pir Sayed Ahmad Gailani, the leader of a refugee group opposed to the extremist Islamic Taliban regime. 
Gailani, who convened the Peshawar conference, said he hopes to produce a resolution by Thursday outlining the broad contours of an alternative government. 
But Gailani, a royalist who supports the return of Afghanistan's exiled 87-year-old monarch, Mohammad Zaher Shah, to whom he is related, acknowledged that the success of the meeting has been complicated by the continued U.S. bombing in Afghanistan.
In addition to solidifying support for the Taliban, the strikes have prevented those in Afghanistan who support the creation of an alternative government from attending the meeting here. 
"We don't know how many will be able to make it across the border," Gailani said. 
As the U.S. campaign continues and opposition Northern Alliance forces in Afghanistan advance, there has been increased concern that diplomatic and political efforts to construct a new Afghan political structure are lagging far behind the events on the battlefront. 
A senior Pakistani official estimated Tuesday that it will take "weeks if not months" to construct a viable alternative to the Taliban.
This creates enormous problems for the post-Taliban order if Northern Alliance forces capture Kabul, the Afghan capital, before any interim government structure can be forged. 
"Our hope is that the Afghan groups can find a common ground," the official said in a background briefing in Islamabad, the Pakistani capital. 
But the official admitted that it's unclear just how much power and support any of the predominantly ethnic Pushtun attendees at the meeting still have.
Many are aging former moujahedeen leaders who have spent years living as refugees in Pakistan or overseas. 
"They have considerable conflicts of ambition.
They may have exaggerated their influence, and there is no way for us to assess how much influence they still have until they actually move into Afghanistan," the official said.
He said the three measures of support are how many fighters they have, how much territory they control and how many weapons they possess. 
The official noted that the Taliban's sweeping 1996 victory in Afghanistan was built on hundreds of detailed agreements with local commanders, many of whom had served leaders now in exile.
U.S.-led efforts to spark an organized resistance to the Taliban in Afghanistan, particularly in the largely Pushtun south, have so far failed, the official said. 
"There is no visible resistance on the ground yet," the official said.
"No divisions.
No bloody battles." 
The Peshawar meeting has been ridiculed by Taliban officials.
In a news conference Tuesday in Islamabad, they dismissed it as an attempt by opposition groups to win money and support from foreign powers. 
"This thing has been arranged by those seeking to get assistance and money from Americans," said Abdul Salam Zaeef, the Taliban's ambassador to Pakistan.
"It has become a very lucrative trade.
It will not have any consequences." 
Another meeting for Afghan leaders may take place in Turkey in coming days.
The meeting in Istanbul has been proposed by leaders of the Northern Alliance who don't feel that they will get adequate representation in Peshawar. 
"We will be extremely pleased if this meeting takes place in Turkey," Turkish Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit said. 
But Turkish Foreign Minister Ismail Cem said the country hasn't decided whether to allow the meeting to proceed.
"We are still assessing the request," he said.
"We need to know who is coming." 
Cem's comments reflect Turkey's concern that the meeting could be a failure unless it has a sufficient number of ethnic Pushtuns, who make up the majority of the Afghan population. 
Those concerns have resonated at the United Nations.
At the U.N. on Tuesday, special envoy Lakhdar Brahimi told Security Council members that he plans to travel Friday to Pakistan, Iran and other countries in the region. 
"My intention is to visit all the neighbors of Afghanistan, and I am looking forward to an opportunity to talk directly to as many Afghan parties as possible," Brahimi said after the meeting.
"This has come very strongly in discussions with the council that what we need in terms of political dispensation for Afghanistan is a genuinely home-grown arrangement. 
"Nobody wants an arrangement that is imposed on Afghanistan.
The Afghans would not accept it, and the international community, I think, understands that.
" 
Here in Peshawar, the aging corps of former Afghan leaders and moujahedeen commanders began assembling this week for the meeting. 
One of the men arriving at the Gailani residential compound Monday was Wakil Bas Mohammed Din Matine, 73, who served in Afghanistan's parliament under Zaher Shah for decades until the monarch was deposed in 1973. 
Fingering a string of beads, Matine said the meeting today is to seek "a level ground for the return of peace." 
Other figures circulating in Peshawar were actively pushing for their leaders to play a major political role. 
Musa Khan, 43, said he was there to promote the loya jirga candidacy of his leader, former moujahedeen commander Abdul Rasul Sayyaf, who is one of the few Pushtuns allied with the predominantly Tajik and Uzbek Northern Alliance. 
"If you want a Pushtun leader," said Khan, acting very much like a floor leader in a political convention as he made the rounds of reporters at the Peshawar Pearl Continental Hotel, "the best man is our leader, Abdul Rasul Sayyaf."    
Times staff writers Richard Boudreaux in Rome and John J. Goldman at the United Nations and special correspondent Amberin Zaman in Ankara, Turkey, contributed to this report.
After an executive at a New York area cable TV company ordered journalists not to display the American flag, his boss -- also his brother -- said he was giving out 24,000 flags to the company's employees.
The familial battle at the News 12 Networks illustrates a wider debate within television over use of the potent political symbol.
Journalists are weighing whether wearing the flag during an intense period of patriotism and grief conflicts with their impulse to avoid any appearance of not being objective on a story.
CNN, Fox News Channel and MSNBC have all been displaying flag graphics on their screens during their coverage of the aftermath of last week's terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon.
NBC's Tim Russert wore a red, white and blue ribbon Sunday on "Meet the Press."
Yet at ABC News, as Barbara Walters explained on "The View" Thursday, wearing the flag is discouraged because it may confuse the audience.
Pat Dolan, news director of News 12, ordered the flag ban in a memo to his staff earlier this week.
News 12 airs newscasts on Long Island, Westchester County, southern Connecticut, New Jersey and the Bronx.
When Newsday reported his decision, the phones lit up at News 12.
It also prompted Dolan to go on the air, apologize twice for any concerns, and assert that News 12 employees "are proud to be Americans."
"We are patriots at News 12, but we don't want anyone to get the false impression that our patriotic emotions cloud our reporting of the truth," Dolan said.
"We need people to be absolutely sure we'll be there to tell them what's happening.
Whether it's good news or bad news, America must know the truth."
Dolan's brother, James -- who's the president of News 12 parent company Cablevision -- said he disagreed but wouldn't override the decision.
"For our own part, Cablevision supports the use of the flag both by the company and its employees to show support for everyone affected by last week's tragedy," James Dolan said, "and we are distributing flags to each of our 24,000 employees."
Although News 12 won't let its journalists wear the flag, the newscasts -- just like the national cable news networks -- use the flag in onscreen graphics.
News 12 wouldn't comment on whether the controversy has affected its advertising.
Pat Dolan's memo flabbergasted Fox News Channel anchorman Brit Hume.
"This is not the flag of the Bush administration or the Democratic Party, this is the flag of the country itself," Hume said in an interview Thursday.
"If you're an American and choose to display the flag, it's difficult for me to see when that would ever be inappropriate.
"We're talking about a news director banning a display anywhere a viewer can see it of an American flag on an American news channel by American personnel," Hume said.
"Does this news director believe he is representing Switzerland?"
Hume doesn't believe that flag-waving would leave journalists reluctant to ask difficult questions of American leaders.
The liberal advocacy group Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting, however, says the flag displays amount to taking sides.
"At a time when many see the media as beating the drums for war, imposing the U.S. flag over what should be balanced reporting doesn't help," said FAIR senior analyst Steve Rendall.
"It reinforces the view that the media are not independent."
Walters said ABC News discourages display of the flag because viewers might wonder whether an employee who doesn't wear it is less patriotic than one who does.
NBC has no policy, a spokeswoman said.
CBS spokeswoman Sandra Genelius said that "as a rule, our people do not wear their hearts or their politics on their sleeves."
If someone objects, they can talk to CBS News President Andrew Heyward, she said. 
Israel withdrew tanks and troops from Palestinian neighborhoods in the volatile West Bank city of Hebron in Monday's early hours, a fresh attempt to breathe life into a truce negotiated under U.S. pressure.
Eyewitnesses said tanks and armored personnel carriers rumbled out of hilltop Palestinian neighborhoods before dawn, without any exchange of fire with local Palestinian gunmen.
Israeli forces took over the strategic ridges in Hebron two weeks ago following repeated shootings at Jewish settlers in the city center below.
Israel is also preparing additional steps, such as removing roadblocks inside the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, and reopening border crossings for Palestinians with Egypt and Jordan, the two sides said.
"The guiding principle is that wherever there is quiet, and the quiet continues, we will remove the (restrictions)," Raanan Gissin, a spokesman for Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, said on Sunday.
But he also warned, "if the shooting is resumed, we will return immediately."
The withdrawal followed a meeting of Israeli and Palestinian security officials in the city.
The United States has been urging both sides to show restraint as the Americans attempt to build support in Arab and Muslim countries for their anti-terror campaign.
The truce has been sorely tested on both sides since it was agreed on Sept 26.
On Sunday Israeli forces shot dead a Palestinian accused of orchestrating a suicide bombing that killed 22 people in June.
Palestinians called the death of Abed-Rahman Hamad, a regional leader of the radical Islamic group Hamas, a grave violation of the cease-fire.
Sharon, citing Israel's right to defend itself against attacks like the Tel Aviv disco bombing for which he held Hamad responsible, said in a speech on Sunday the shooting "was not the first nor the last."
Hamad, 35, knew the Israelis were after him and rarely strayed far from his home, except to visit a nearby mosque for prayers, acquaintances said.
He attended pre-dawn prayers Sunday and was atop his flat-top roof when he was hit by fire from Israeli troops about 300 yards away, according to acquaintances.
The shooting marked a return to Israel's policy of targeted killings.
Over the past year, Israel has carried out dozens of such attacks against Palestinian militants suspected of violence against Israelis.
Sunday's shooting was the first since the cease-fire was declared.
Several thousand Palestinians attended Hamad's funeral on Sunday afternoon.
Gunmen fired into the air and mourners carried leaflets reading, "Revenge, revenge," and "No to the cease-fire."
"Resistance against this ugly aggression is the only language which can be used, and there is no doubt that Hamas will react to this ugly assassination crime," said Abdel Aziz Rantisi, a senior Hamas leader.
Hamas has carried out multiple suicide bombings against Israel, including the disco bombing, the deadliest single attack in the current round of Mideast fighting.
Israel had named Hamad as one of the militants it wanted arrested by Arafat's Palestinian Authority.
The Palestinians had detained Hamad, but then released him about a month ago, Israel said.
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat has demanded that Hamas and other militant groups observe the truce, but they have refused to endorse it.
Sharon has demanded that the Palestinians make arrests before easing security restrictions which have prevented tens of thousands of Palestinians from reaching their jobs in Israel.
The Palestinians call it collective punishment, while Israel says it is necessary to prevent attacks. 
Copyright 2001 Associated Press
Summit:
But discord keeps Islamic-Christian meeting in Rome from issuing a condemnation of the Sept. 11 attacks. 
Leading Christian and Muslim clerics, meeting here to debate the fallout of last month's attacks on the United States, have rejected the use of religion to justify terrorism and urged followers to search for peace through understanding. 
But after two days of heated discussion that vented anti-American feelings, the appeal from the so-called Islamic-Christian Summit stopped short of condemning the Sept. 11 slaughter at the Pentagon and World Trade Center. 
Sant'Egidio, a Roman Catholic lay group that mediates international conflicts, hoped to elicit a joint Muslim-Christian rebuke of the attacks, which the Bush administration has blamed on Osama bin Laden, an Islamic fundamentalist who has declared holy war on the United States and its allies. 
However, Islamic clerics insisted on broadening the condemnation to what they call other forms of terrorism--Israel's treatment of Palestinians and the deprivations of Iraqis under U.S.-led international sanctions. 
Delegates said they were stymied by the debate and decided to avoid any references to specific acts of terror. 
"The Islamic community wanted the document to say something about Palestine, but that wasn't something everybody could agree with," George Freeman, general secretary of the World Methodist Council, said Friday as he and other delegates headed home.
"That's a wider issue than what the summit was called for." 
The appeal for peace, read to 3,000 people at a candlelight ceremony late Thursday, demanded that "no one use the name of God to take the life of an innocent victim." 
"Whoever uses the name of God to hate and choose the way of violence abandons pure religion," it added.
"To speak of religious war is an absurdity." 
Andrea Riccardi, the founder of Sant'Egidio and organizer of the meeting, acknowledged the clashing views that were behind the statement. 
"One declaration cannot change everything," he said.
"We are in the heart of a long-term process of understanding." 
Nasr Farid Wassel, who is grand mufti of Egypt, and 11 other Muslim clerics, theologians, philosophers and jurists of Islamic law took part in the meeting.
Seven Roman Catholic cardinals were among 19 Christian delegates, who also included Orthodox, Lutheran, Methodist and Episcopal leaders. 
The Muslim participants--from Egypt, Iran, Saudi Arabia, the Persian Gulf States and the United States--are moderates within the Islamic world.
But some used the meeting to attack the U.S. and Israeli policies. 
"America has contributed to many terrorist acts in the world: Vietnam . . .
the continuous support for Israel against the Palestinian people," said Mohammed Said Noamani of Iran's Organization of Culture and Islamic Relations.
"For that reason, America cannot be the champion of the struggle against terrorism in the world." 
One thing that united Christians and Muslims at the summit was rejection of Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi's recent assertion of the superiority of Western civilization. 
"The terrorists must be identified and disarmed, but that cannot be done if an entire culture, religion or nation is held responsible," said Cardinal Carlo Maria Martini, archbishop of Milan. 
Freeman, whose North Carolina-based council represents Methodist denominations in 132 countries, said he was "puzzled" by the summit's failure to condemn the attacks on America but was leaving Rome "with a good feeling that we have spoken to each other about what Islam is." 
"There's a lot of ignorance about that in the United States," he added.
"Some people have equated Islam with terrorism.
We need to do a lot of education to communicate that this is not the case."
Trial:
Ex-aide describes how the militant set up a network designed to drive the U.S. from the Mideast.
A once-trusted aide of Islamic extremist Osama bin Laden provided a jury on Tuesday the most direct and intimate portrait publicly available of the Saudi militant's terror network designed to drive Americans from the Middle East.
The former aide said Bin Laden was enraged when U.S. forces led the Persian Gulf War against Iraq in 1991 and when it later sent troops into Somalia in 1993.
According to the testimony, Bin Laden called America "the snake" and declared, "We have to cut the head off and stop them."
Jamal Ahmed Al-Fadl, whose identity had been kept secret until he appeared in court, was the first witness called in the trial of four Bin Laden followers charged with killing 224 people in bomb attacks on two U.S. embassies in East Africa in 1998.
Al-Fadl has been in the federal witness protection program since breaking with Bin Laden before the bombings.
U.S. District Judge Leonard B. Sand warned court artists not to sketch Al-Fadl's face.
Federal prosecutors allege that the embassy bombings were the work of the network Bin Laden set up to kill U.S. citizens and bring down pro-Western governments.
During more than five hours of testimony in heavily accented English, he took jurors inside the Bin Laden organization, on a tour ranging from training camps in Afghanistan, where recruits learned to use weapons and explosives, to a sprawling guest house in Sudan where plots against American interests were hatched.
Al-Fadl said he was present, for example, at meetings soon after the Soviet Union was driven from Afghanistan at which Bin Laden created the organization called al-Qaeda (the Base).
"He said, 'We want to change our governments,' " Al-Fadl recalled.
When the U.S.-Iraq conflict erupted in 1991, Al-Fadl said he attended a meeting in a three-story guest house al-Qaeda owned in Khartoum, the capital of Sudan.
The sentiment of the group was simple, the witness said: "We can't let the American Army stay in the Gulf area and get our oil and our money.
We have to fight them.
We have to take them out."
Al-Fadl told the jury he was born in Sudan in 1963, traveled to the United States on a student visa in 1986 and lived in Brooklyn, Atlanta and North Carolina.
He said he first met Bin Laden at a guest house in Afghanistan after receiving weapon training in preparation for fighting Soviet troops on the Afghan front.
Al-Fadl said he again met Bin Laden in 1989 as the war was winding down and the Islamic militant told him he was thinking about creating al-Qaeda because "everything's over in Afghanistan."
Al-Fadl said he was a very early member of al-Qaeda.
Dissecting the terrorist organization, he provided a unique glimpse of its anatomy.
Al-Fadl said al-Qaeda was composed of several committees: a Shura Council that set overall policy, a Committee for the Military Purpose that bought weapons and conducted training, a Fatwa Committee that issued Islamic decrees, a Newspaper Committee that published a weekly newspaper, and a Money and Business Committee that handled investments and established front companies.
Training ranged from how to fire light weapons, use rocket-propelled grenades and how best to blow up buildings.
Recruits also were told how to behave at airports when approaching customs.
Al-Fadl said the military committee issued false passports and tickets.
He recalled once during a trip to Egypt that he was instructed to shave his beard to avoid suspicion, wear Western dress, leave his books about jihad at home, take cigarettes and bring cologne.
"It's good for women, so you look like you are interested in women," he said.
"They tell you when customs opens your bag, be nice and smile.
Don't carry anything that attracts attention.
Just say, 'I come for a visit.'
Nothing to do with Islam," Al-Fadl added.
As he spoke, the witness painted a portrait of al-Qaeda both as a sophisticated and a somewhat tribal organization, with some members working on farms.
Al-Fadl said al-Qaeda moved from Afghanistan to Sudan in the early 1990s, where Bin Laden bought real estate and farms to grow crops and train terrorists.
Al-Qaeda operated several businesses, including a construction company and an investment firm specializing in foreign exchange transactions.
The companies, which were replicated in other countries, served to generate income, provide fronts and disguise paramilitary training.
The group also had political clout at the highest levels, the witness told the jury.
He said Sudan's president, Lt. Gen. Omar Hassan Ahmed Bashir, issued a letter waiving customs dues for goods al-Qaeda brought into the country.
Sudan's intelligence service cooperated with al-Qaeda's operatives to screen out spies seeking to infiltrate the terrorist organization.
"We are afraid someone come and take information and give it to another country," Al-Fadl told the jury in halting English.
The witness said two spies were imprisoned and one was executed.
He said Bin Laden liked to deal in cash.
Al-Fadl said that in preparation for the move to Sudan, al-Qaeda's money and business committee gave him $180,000 to buy a salt farm near the Red Sea, where explosives training later took place.
And he said the Saudi multimillionaire was frugal, if not stingy.
Al-Fadl said he was paid $500 a month in cash.
Others, he said,received sugar, tea and food as wages.
He said he once asked for a raise but was turned down.
Bin Laden occupied a spacious room in a big house in Khartoum with a frontyard and backyard, and members of al-Qaeda would gather at the house for prayers, lectures and strategy sessions.
"Sometimes we would take dinner together," Al-Fadl recalled. "
Bin Laden had an office in a big room on the second floor."
He told Assistant U.S. Atty.
Patrick J. Fitzgerald he met with Bin Laden "a lot--more than 10" times in Sudan.
The prosecutor asked about the sacrifices members of al-Qaeda must make if drafted by the group to fight a holy war.
"Your family, your kids, your money, your business," Al-Fadl said.
"You have to give everything."
Al-Fadl said Bin Laden's organization had conducted training with Hezbollah, the powerful Shiite Muslim group, and provided weapons to jihad, or holy war, organizations in Egypt.
He said the countries where al-Qaeda has branches include Algeria, Libya, Egypt, Syria and the breakaway Russian republic of Chechnya.
The witness, who wore dungarees, a white shirt with stripes and a skullcap, gave the names of scores of Bin Laden associates in staccato speech--words and spellings so fast they tested the mettle of court stenographers.
At one point, Al-Fadl identified Wadih El-Hage, who sat at the defense table in the courtroom.
Prosecutors charge he worked as Bin Laden's personal secretary.
El-Hage faces life in prison without parole, as does co-defendant Mohamed Sadeek Odeh, if found guilty in the embassy bombings.
Two other defendants, Khalfan Khamis Mohamed and Mohamed Rashed Daoud al-'Owhali, could face the death penalty.
Bin Laden, who was indicted in connection with the embassy bombings that killed 12 Americans and injured more than 4,500 people, remains a fugitive, believed to be under the protection of the Taliban regime in Afghanistan.
The U.S. government has offered a $5-million reward for his capture.   
Times staff writer William C. Rempel contributed to this story.
Chirac Visits White House to Pledge Support for U.S. 
Allies:
He's the first in a series of foreign leaders due in Washington this week as the coalition in fight against terrorism continues to grow. 
French President Jacques Chirac, starting a parade of foreign leaders to Washington this week, pledged the support of his government to a U.S. war on terrorism, assuring President Bush on Tuesday that he can count on the nation's oldest ally in a time of peril.
Chirac is the first foreign head of state to visit the White House since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks in New York and Washington.
Later this week, British Prime Minister Tony Blair, German Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer and Indonesian President Megawati Sukarnoputri will be in Washington, while Bush and Secretary of State Colin L. Powell continue to contact other foreign leaders by telephone.
Bush and Chirac met with reporters in the Oval Office before private consultations over dinner.
In his public comments, Chirac said, "We bring you the total solidarity of France and the French people.
It is solidarity of the heart.
We are completely determined to fight by your side this new type of evil."
Chirac shied away from calling the conflict a war, a phrase Bush used repeatedly in their joint appearance.
"I don't know whether we should use the word 'war,' but what I can say is that now we are faced with a conflict of a completely new nature," Chirac said.
He added that the attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon amounted to "something which is beyond crime."
For his part, Bush continued his effort to prepare the American people--and U.S. allies--for a sustained campaign against terrorism that, given the nature of the enemy, will be different from past conflicts.
"This war will require determination and patience," Bush said.
"It's important for the world to understand that there are no beaches to storm, there are no islands to conquer, there are no battle lines to be drawn.
It's a war that is going to take an international effort."
At the State Department, officials have recorded messages of sympathy and condolence from 194 countries, a tally that spokesman Richard Boucher said was higher "than the number of countries I thought existed in the world."
Of course, expressions of sympathy are one thing and active support for U.S. military action against the terrorist network of Osama bin Laden is something far different.
But Bush and Powell are talking to as many foreign leaders as they can reach to appeal for their unconditional backing.
On Tuesday, Bush telephoned U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan, Brazilian President Fernando Henrique Cardoso and Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien.
At the Pentagon, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld left little doubt that foreign governments are being asked to endorse a potentially long and bitter conflict, albeit one that might not start for some time.
"This is a new type of conflict," he said.
"We're moving in a very measured manner as we gather information."
Once that information is collected, he said, "We're talking about a very broadly based campaign to go after the terrorist problem where it exists, and it exists in countries across the globe.
" A war in Afghanistan "will not be quick and it will not be easy," he added.
Rumsfeld's suggestion that an attack might not be imminent was echoed by senior officials in the Pentagon and some lawmakers as well.
The circumstances call for "patience and persistence," said one senior official, rather than a quick "lashing out.
"
Sen. Jack Reed (D-R.I.), a member of the Armed Services Committee, pointed to a number of reasons for the United States to move deliberately.
Information on the location of terrorists is tough to find, he said, and the United States cannot afford an ineffective strike that might encourage the adversary.
White House Press Secretary Ari Fleischer underlined the point: "I know the president believes his first need is to put together a war plan that will work, over whatever period of time it requires.
"He's aware that the American people are very focused on this right now.
But it doesn't matter the degree of focus.
The president will do what he believes is the right action, and he will not rush it.
He will not delay it.
He will act, as he has said, at a time and a moment and in a way of America's choosing."
Nevertheless, the concentration on Bin Laden and his base in Afghanistan brought the chief of the U.N. refugee agency to Washington to plead for restraint , or at least a careful effort to avoid casualties among noncombatants.
"It is important to be aware of the already desperate plight of millions of Afghan civilians and the humanitarian consequences to ordinary people while formulating policy options," Ruud Lubbers said following meetings at the State Department.
"Thousands of people in Afghanistan are already on the move, joining millions of others who were displaced inside and outside the country even before the latest crisis.
We must do everything we can to avoid further displacement of innocent civilians," he said.
The administration made no promises.
But the State Department announced a $2-million grant to Lubbers' agency to help feed Afghan refugees.
Boucher said most of the food will be distributed to refugee camps in Pakistan because all nongovernmental Western aid workers have left Afghanistan , except for two Americans and their German and Australian colleagues who are on trial for preaching Christianity, a crime in rigidly Muslim Afghanistan.
Before his dinner-table talk with Chirac, Bush presided over a National Security Council meeting to "continue the planning" for an assault on terrorism, Fleischer said.
Then the president held a meeting of his economic advisors "to discuss other types of action that may or may not be required to help the economy," Fleischer added.
At the State Department, Boucher said the administration has not made any deals to enlist foreign governments.
"Remember, people are doing this unconditionally," he said.
"They're joining the fight against terrorism because it's in their interests, because they recognize, too, that this kind of barbarism is an attack on civilization, and on all the great civilizations of the world."
Every government, Boucher said, is being asked, "Can you help us disrupt the financial flows to terrorists ?
Can you close your borders?
Can you investigate aspects of groups or attacks that might be necessary to investigate?
Can you close down offices or operations?"   
Times staff writers Paul Richter and Edwin Chen contributed to this report. 
From insulation hidden behind walls at home to highly visible power plants outdoors, the first international treaty to fight global warming is poised to change landscapes, and lives, around the world -- except in the United States.
In the final moments of a two-week conference in Morocco, negotiators from 165 countries agreed on hard-fought rules for implementing the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, which calls on about 40 industrialized nations to limit carbon emissions or cut them to below 1990 levels.
As a result, mountain ridges and coastlines are likely to sprout plantations of steel windmills.
With nations under pressure to cut pollution, new cars, household appliances, even the simple light bulb will have to be designed to save energy.
And carbon dioxide -- a substance we exhale with every breath  will be a controlled gas and a marketable commodity with a price.
Scientists believe the carbon that humans let loose in the atmosphere, mostly from factories and vehicles, has upset the natural balance, sending temperatures up and changing the climate.
Already, glaciers are melting, sea levels rising and severe storms becoming more frequent.
The agreement on the Marrakech rules -- scores of pages of complex legal text -- cleared the way for the landmark treaty to be ratified, probably some time next year, and become binding law for its signatories.
The United States, however, has rejected the accord, calling it harmful to the U.S. economy and unfair because it excused heavily polluting developing countries like India and China from any obligation.
In Washington, White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said Saturday that President Bush took note of the rules agreed upon in Morocco.
"He agrees with the need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
His Cabinet review is under way, to determine a way that can be done without forcing America into a deep recession," Fleischer said.
Bush has said the United States will take independent action to combat global warming.
He has set up programs to further study climate change and encourage research on new technology.
The Kyoto Protocol sets tough targets for slashing carbon emissions.
Japan, for example, agreed to cut them by 6 percent from the 1990 level -- but its emissions have grown by 17 percent since 1990, making that task far more formidable.
To ease the burden, the protocol establishes mechanisms to let countries partly offset their targets.
They can earn credits for proper management of forests and farmlands that absorb carbon dioxide -- so-called carbon sinks -- and for helping developing countries avoid emissions.
The accord also allows for emissions trading, letting countries that cannot meet their targets buy the right to pollute from those that come in under their quota.
However, negotiators agreed that such mechanisms can only supplement real emission cuts -- not replace them -- and countries will have to adopt energy-saving measures to meet their targets.
That means old houses should have their electrical wiring redone, their windows triple glazed and their walls insulated to conserve energy.
Solar panels may appear on more rooftops, and new refrigerators made to will run on one-tenth the energy of old ones.
The rules could lead to more public transportation and changes in city planning to scale back the use of cars.
At the same time, hybrid autos using fuel cells already are on the roads, and car companies are researching engines that use less fuel and emit less carbon.
Many countries will set up domestic carbon trading markets where companies can buy and sell carbon credits.
A similar U.S. market for sulfur dioxide was credited with helping reduce acid rain in the 1990s.
"Carbon will have a price.
Until now, you could put as much carbon in the air as you wanted for free," said David Doniger of the Washington-based Natural Resources Defense Council.
"That's going to affect the way power plants are built and the way cars are being designed."
Environmentalists say mechanisms like emissions trading are loopholes that have diluted the goal of Kyoto: to clean up polluting industries and reduce actual emissions.
But they welcomed the Marrakech agreement.
The accord assigns each country a specific target, but the average is a 5.2 percent emission reduction from 1990 levels by 2012.
"Five percent is not going to be achieved, but that doesn't mean it's not worth having," said Bill Hare of Greenpeace, speaking Saturday for a coalition of environmental groups.
"This is a first step."
Britain: Premier's role on the global stage has earned him praise--and title of "Mr. President."
In Britain, Prime Minister Tony Blair is being called a moral visionary in the mold of 19th century statesman William Gladstone, a commander in the cloak of Winston Churchill and, less fondly, "Mr. President.
"
In the United States, President Bush simply calls him "friend."
Since the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon, Blair has dedicated himself to the role of America's closest ally in the U.S. war on terrorism.
His job in this partnership has been to articulate the moral and legal case against the suspected author of the assaults, Osama bin Laden, and to shore up international support for military action.
Blair has made it his mission.
As the embers still smoldered in New York and near Washington, Blair appeared beside First Lady Laura Bush for the president's speech to Congress, joining in standing ovations.
He shuttled back and forth among European allies and met with Russian President Vladimir V. Putin in Moscow before flying to the front line in Pakistan and on to India.
He offered British troops for the war.
But his greater contribution may be this: While the president of a wounded nation sought retaliation, the prime minister of Britain sought to make sense of the senseless killing of thousands.
He appealed for a new world order, in which rich countries help the poor and put down tyrants, to serve as a memorial to the dead.
"Out of the shadow of this evil should emerge lasting good: destruction of the machinery of terrorism wherever it is found, hope amongst all nations of a new beginning where we seek to resolve differences in a calm and ordered way, greater understanding between nations and between faiths, and, above all, justice and prosperity for the poor and dispossessed," Blair said to his Labor Party last week.
Globalization applies not just to trade, he argued, but also to conflict and chaos, confidence and order.
"The world community must show as much its capacity for compassion as for force," he said.
"What is the lesson of the financial markets, climate change, international terrorism, nuclear proliferation or world trade?
It is that our self-interest and our mutual interests are today inextricably woven together."
The 48-year-old prime minister's eloquence earned him praise from normally hostile quarters.
"Blair's Finest Hour," said the conservative Daily Telegraph newspaper, evoking Churchill.
"This was the speech that persuaded the nation that our prime minister is more than equal to the challenge we face."
Some people joked that this was "the inaugural speech of the president of the world" and dismissed Blair's lofty goals as impractical, if not arrogant.
Writing in the Evening Standard, political commentator Andrew Rawnsley reminded readers that Blair was seeking to solve all of the world's problems while failing to repair Britain's decrepit public services.
"If the man can't fix the school lavatories, what hope for plumbing in a new world order?" Rawnsley asked.
But even he acknowledged that Blair's idealism was "a damned sight better than possessing no vision at all of a better world."
This vision of a world community is not new for Blair.
He discovered the theme as a student at Oxford in the mid-1970s, when friends introduced him to Christian theology and social doctrine, and he carried it into politics when he was elected a member of Parliament from the northern mining town of Sedgefield in 1983.
To friends in government and the Labor Party, Blair's convictions are his strength.
"He has a strong moral code based firmly in religious belief," said David Hill, a Labor Party activist.
"This gives him a clear sense of moral duty and right and wrong."
To critics, it can make him an insufferable preacher, better suited to teaching Sunday school than to leading a nation as secular as Britain.
The satirical magazine Private Eye has dubbed the prime minister Vicar of St. Albion.
And that was before Blair called Jews, Muslims and Christians "all children of Abraham" at the Labor Party conference.
But Blair has made a career of breaking with tradition.
He was known as something of a rule-breaker at boarding school and university, where he played guitar with a rock band called Ugly Rumors.
In politics, Blair became an anti-crime crusader, pushed the leftist party to the center and, at 41, was elected the youngest Labor leader in British history.
He soon jettisoned the party's old commitment to nationalization and state control of the economy and, taking a page from the "new Democrats" who had recently elected President Clinton, forged the "new Labor" party.
The Tories dismissed him as "Tony Blur" and "Bambi," but the public didn't.
In May 1997, his new Labor ended 18 years of Conservative rule, and Blair took over as prime minister.
In his first term, he threw himself into the pursuit of peace in Northern Ireland, devolution of power to parliaments in Scotland and Wales, and the abolition of hereditary peers in the House of Lords, Britain's upper chamber of Parliament, whom many people saw as relics of a feudal society.
With a large majority in the House of Commons, he got almost everything he wanted.
He had the great fortune of governing at a time of economic abundance and weak political opposition, fumbling only once during his first term in the face of protests over fuel taxes.
Even grumpy media smiled on him when his wife, attorney Cherie Booth, became pregnant and delivered their fourth child at age 45.
Blair didn't even have to leave home to kiss babies.
Although Britons were unhappy with the lack of progress on their schools, National Health Service and decaying railroad system, in June the Labor Party won its second landslide victory--albeit with the lowest voter turnout since World War I--and kept Blair in power.
It was the first time that the 100-year-old party had retaken 10 Downing St. after a full term in office.
Blair established himself as a statesman during the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's 1999 bombing of Yugoslavia, when he made his debut on the world stage as a man on a mission against evil.
With a couple of exceptions, Britain and the United States have backed each other in military campaigns since the Korean War.
As an English-speaking former empire, Britain has seen itself as America's No. 1 ally.
But the prime minister's role has sometimes been to goad Washington into tougher action and sometimes to argue restraint.
In a conversation with then-President George H. W. Bush about anti-Iraq sanctions during the 1991 Persian Gulf War, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher famously warned the U.S. leader that "this is no time to go wobbly."
She wanted the U.S.-led military coalition to bring down Iraqi President Saddam Hussein, but the war stopped at Iraq's retreat from occupation of Kuwait.
Likewise, Blair pushed his good friend Clinton to prepare ground troops for deployment into Yugoslavia during the 1999 campaign to expel Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic's troops from Kosovo province and end the brutal crackdown there.
Clinton, at least initially, balked, and NATO forces managed to achieve their goals through air attacks.
Blair has since sent peacekeeping troops to Sierra Leone and Macedonia and said that if the 1994 slaughter of more than 800,000 people in Rwanda were to happen today, he would act.
"Blair is a very moralistic leader, compared by many to Gladstone," who also was an exponent of international moralism, said Oxford professor Vernon Bogdanor.
"He would like to hold communities or whole nations responsible for other nations.
Blair's difficulty is that sometimes there is a gap between his ideals and practice."
When Clinton was replaced by Bush, many in Britain feared that the "special relationship" between London and Washington would come to an end.
But Blair quickly made a pilgrimage to Camp David, offering to serve as a bridge between the United States and Europe.
Bush subsequently visited the prime minister at his weekend retreat, Chequers, and the two declared that they had gotten on famously.
The special relationship, it turned out, was as institutional as it was personal.
Almost as soon as the hijacked airplanes crashed into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, Blair headed to the battlefront.
He feared that Bush would withdraw into isolationism or, worse, blindly strike back on his own.
Blair was one of the first leaders to get through to Bush on the telephone to express his solidarity and offer help.
As Bush called for Bin Laden "dead or alive," Blair threw his voice behind U.S. Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and others arguing for moderation.
He sought to reassure Muslims that this was not a war against Islam but a war against terrorism, and he sent his foreign secretary to Iran with that message.
Blair has been unwavering in his support for the U.S., marching toward a war in Afghanistan with scarcely a nod to his Cabinet or Parliament.
In a country where the prime minister is regarded as first among equals in Parliament, this has rubbed many the wrong way.
"So just when did we elect Tony Blair president?"
columnist Robert Harris asked in the Daily Telegraph.
"Gradually, it has become apparent that America is the country run by a Cabinet of powerful equals . . .
and the legislature has to be treated with respect.
It is Britain that looks like the presidential state, with no Cabinet government left to speak of, with the spotlight directed onto a single chief executive and with a legislature that barely merits consultation."
When Parliament was recalled from recess last week, Conservative member John Wilkinson addressed Blair, "Would the president--er, prime minister. . . .
" The chamber filled with laughter, some of it nervous.
But although political observers cringed at the process, the people have supported the policy.
A poll taken Sept. 23 showed a 76% approval rating for the way Blair is handling the British response to the terrorist attacks.
Disease: U.S. House is shut down until next week for 'environmental sweep.'
Spores sent to offices in New York and Florida are found to be the same strain.
Concern about bioterrorism mounted Wednesday as early tests showed that 31 staff members at the Capitol have been exposed to anthrax and that spores mailed to the publisher of supermarket tabloids in Florida and to NBC News in New York were the same strain.
And in an unprecedented move, the House of Representatives was closed to allow what Speaker Dennis Hastert called an "environmental sweep" of the chamber.
The national Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, which identified the Florida-New York strain, reported that the matching strains do not necessarily mean that the anthrax came from the same source and that further tests were needed.
It was also unclear, CDC officials said, whether it matched anthrax in an envelope sent to Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle in Washington.
Atty.
Gen John Ashcroft, appearing on a TV news program, said preliminary analysis showed that the anthrax sent to Daschle was "virulent, strong, very serious."
Although anthrax occurs naturally in animals, law enforcement officials said the sample sent to Daschle was "professionally" manufactured.
"There has been some attempt to collect it, refine it and make it more concentrated," said Dr. Scott Lillibridge, head of the office for National Security and Bioterrorism in the Department of Health and Human Services.
He and Health Secretary Tommy Thompson agreed in testimony to a congressional subcommittee that the letter to Daschle was "a very serious attempt at anthrax poisoning."
But Thompson disputed reports that the anthrax was "weapons-grade."
Cultures taken from Daschle's sample showed that this particular strain of anthrax is treatable by "all antibiotics, penicillin all the way to ciprofloxacin," said Gen. John Parker, who heads the medical research command at Ft.
Detrick, Md., where they were tested.
"It's a very sensitive strain," Parker said.
* Concern spread to the the midtown Manhattan offices of New York Gov. George Pataki, where small amounts of anthrax were found in a secure area used by state police.
Employees tested negative for exposure, but everyone in the office will be given antibiotics, including the governor.
* President Bush asked Congress for an additional $1.5 billion to fight terrorism and prevent and respond to bioterrorism.
It would be a six-fold increase over the $297 million Congress has appropriated for this year be used to produce smallpox vaccine and increase drug stockpiles.
* In Florida, preliminary tests showed that a threatening letter sent to a Planned Parenthood clinic in the town of Stuart, 30 miles north of Palm Beach, was contaminated with anthrax.
But police were dubious, and it was sent to a laboratory in Miami for a more conclusive analysis.
In Washington, the House of Representatives was physically closed Wednesday night for what Library of Congress researchers said was the first time.
Congressional leaders said it would remain shut for five days, along with its office buildings, to allow a comprehensive sweep of the facilities to determine if they contained any harmful substances.
The Senate ordered a sweep of its offices as well.
But Senate leaders insisted on staying in session today, in part because they feared that a complete shutdown of Congress would sent the public an unnerving impression of the government in panic.
Among the 31 staff members who tested positive for anthrax exposure, three worked for Sen. Russell Feingold (D-Wis.), whose office is adjacent to Daschle's.
Anthrax spores also were found in the Senate mail room, which is in still another office building.
Congressional leaders tried to calm edgy nerves by underscoring that none of the people who had tested positive for exposure actually had been infected and made ill.
They emphasized that the anthrax involved was readily treatable and that everyone exposed was taking antibiotics.
Thompson and Lillibridge spoke to senators at a Government Affairs subcommittee in the Dirksen Senate Office Building before it was closed.
They spoke calmly--in stark contrast to the atmosphere among groups of staffers, who spread the news that more than two dozen of their colleagues had tested positive for anthrax exposure.
The staffers asked each other whether they were taking the antibiotic Cipro.
Thompson told the senators that 1,200 bottles of the antibiotic had been sent to the Senate to threat those who were exposed.
He said some 1,000 people will be tested.
The secretary said the FDA will approve two additional antibiotics--doxycycline and penicillin--for treatment of anthrax.
Both, he said, are effective against the types of anthrax found so far.
"Because these drugs are available in generic form and produced by several manufacturers," Thompson said, "they will be relatively inexpensive and readily available."
* Support additional epidemiological teams that can be sent into cities around the country to respond to infectious disease outbreaks and other public health risks.
* Beef up laboratories in 45 states.
* Help hospitals and emergency departments prepare for and respond to incidents requiring mass treatment or immunization.
Law enforcement officials acknowledged many unanswered questions about the anthrax sent to Capitol Hill.
They said they want to know whether it contained any additives to prevent it from clumping and becoming harder to inhale.
Terrorists seeking to inflict the most damage would try to manufacture particles small enough to be inhaled, but big enough to be absorbed in the lungs, according to a bioterrorism expert in federal law enforcement, who asked to remain anonymous.
Particles falling in that range would be of particular concern, the official said.
FBI profilers studied notes found in the mailings to Daschle and to NBC, including one that sources said declared, "Allah is great" and "Death to America."
The profilers "are analyzing every word to see what patterns it fits and to see if the words are consistent with actual Islamic culture or someone trying to create a false impression," an FBI official said.
"There's no link to anyone that would suggest a motivation at this point, terrorist or otherwise," the official said.
"And no one has claimed credit."
No one knows who is responsible, a senior federal law enforcement official said.
Even within the FBI, he said, there have been many discussions, even disagreements, about whether the letters were the product of an organized effort linked to terrorists who attacked New York and the Pentagon on Sept. 11 with hijacked airliners.
"You just don't have enough information to make a reasoned decision to rule them in or out," he said of the Sept. 11 hijackers.
In New York, Gov. Pataki said the anthrax was found in his offices after his secretary received an envelope Monday that seemed suspicious.
The envelope was tested.
The secretary and mail handlers also received tests.
All came back negative.
"But on Monday night, we ordered environmental tests, and one test indicated a positive . . .
for the probability of anthrax in the office," Pataki said.
"It was in a secure area used by the state police.
As a result, we have closed our state offices on two floors .
Seventy-five or 80 people work there, the governor said.
"The offices will be cleaned.
Hopefully by Monday we'll be back in the office.
People have been given Cipro as a prophylactic.
I too will be taking Cipro.
"But there is no indication in any individual of anthrax."
Pataki said the contamination was found on a desk surface.
"We don't have any real belief that the envelope in question is the source of it.
I'm the governor of New York.
I get some very strange mail.
State police and the FBI will investigate all possible sources. . . .
"We'll also test the state capital," Pataki said, "just as a matter of caution and prudence."
At NBC, officials said the first 500 of 1,304 employees it tested for anthrax exposure were negative.
Dr. Steve Ostroff, a CDC official, said: "There is no evidence of ongoing carriage of the organism."
The network said its facilities at 30 Rockefeller Plaza need to be cleaned so employees can be sure that all spores have been removed.
It said the CDC would advise on how the clean-up should be done.
"We've been waiting for good news for a long time," said NBC president Don Wright.
"This is the happiest day I've had in a long time."
At ABC, where the infant son of a producer contracted anthrax after accompanying his mother to a birthday party at work, employees were still awaiting test results.
An examination of its air conditioning system proved negative.
Police Chief Bernard Kerik said tests at city facilities have similarly proved negative and that security measures are in effect in subways.
In Florida, postal workers in Stuart found a threatening letter addressed to a Planned Parenthood clinic.
A preliminary test indicated anthrax, but police were dubious.
Police Chief Joe Lyons called the test "extremely unreliable" said said: "We do not believe that we have a case of anthrax."
The police were alerted after 9 a.m. Monday.
Martin County Sheriff's deputies and the county fire rescue squad, wearing protective suits, removed the letter, tested the its powdery contents, then took it to a Florida Health Department laboratory in Miami, 30 miles south, for a more conclusive analysis.
The letter was signed by "the Army of God" and contained "anti-abortion ramblings," Lyons said.
Its return address, he said, was "the Secret Service in Georgia."
Planned Parenthood clinics across the country have received more than 100 mailed threats, said Lillian Tamayo, chief executive officer of Planned Parenthood of Palm Beach and the Treasure Coast.
"It is appalling," Tamayo said, "that individuals here at home, domestic terrorists by any other name, would capitalize on these events to promulgate their agenda."
In Boca Raton, Fla., employees of American Media Inc., a publisher of supermarket tabloids, were given a second round of blood tests and free antibiotics.
And for the first time, workers at firms connected with American Media were examined and given the preventive medications.
Some of the companies handle the publisher's mail and its newspapers, and their employees were worried that they might have come in contact with the bacteria.
American Media received an anthrax-spiked letter earlier this month.
Seven of its employees were exposed.
One has died.
Another has been hospitalized with an anthrax infection.
Postmaster General John E. Potter said "a very minuscule amount of spores" were found at the Boca Raton post office. "
The CDC cleaned it up," he said, "and we are doing business there.
"
Potter said he has ordered no changes in the way carriers deliver mail to businesses and homes.
No postal employee has contracted anthrax, he said, and none has tested positive to exposure.
Potter said the Post Office was making gloves available to its employees, but "most people are not taking advantage of this.
"Many of them take the gloves off after an hour or two because they are uncomfortable."
No machinery or test can detect anthrax in unopened mail, Potter said.
"The best technology right now is common sense, heightened awareness about what is in the mail. . . .
We are looking into technology sources, and I can't go any further than that."
Times staff writers Josh Getlin in New York, Marlene Cimons, Ed Chen, Robert Rosenblatt and Elizabeth Shogren in Washington, John-Thor Dahlburg in Miami and researcher Anna M. Virtue in Miami contributed to this report.
They don't pay particularly well and the work they offer ranges from the dull to the dangerous.
But since Sept. 11, the nation's intelligence agencies have seen a wave of applications more earnest and enormous than recruiters once dared to imagine.
The CIA has fielded 20,000 applications since the terrorist attacks and up to 600 more resumes arrive each day, five times the pre-attack volume.
Not far away at the National Security Agency, 16,000 applications have flooded e-mail and fax lines that collected just 3,000 inquiries in the same six-week stretch a year ago.
In other corners of the intelligence community, the statistics are similar, fueled by resurgent patriotism and a receding private sector economy.
It's an opportune moment for U.S. spy shops, with so many eager recruits and Congress inclined to provide every resource.
But can the agencies capitalize?
Analysts and former intelligence officials are skeptical, saying the CIA and other agencies have been better in recent years at attracting talent than retaining or using it.
"They're getting a lot of good people with good potential, but will they stay?" asked Vince Cannistraro, former chief of counter-terrorism at the CIA.
"Kids come in bright-eyed and bushy-tailed with impressive degrees but walk into this mush factory and quit."
CIA officials acknowledge that the agency isn't for everyone.
The hiring process involves extensive background checks that can take as long as nine months and requires applicants to submit to polygraph tests.
Far more employees work as everyday analysts, programmers and linguists in suburban Virginia than ever see overseas, cloak-and-dagger duty.
And the starting pay is typical federal government scale, ranging from $35,000 to $55,000 a year.
But none of that seemed to curb the enthusiasm of college students this week who flocked to tables occupied by the CIA, the NSA and a host of other intelligence agencies at a job fair at Georgetown University.
While nearby booths drew steady streams of students, the line for one-on-one time with CIA recruiters ran eight-deep.
"I didn't think I'd have to stand in line for an hour to talk to the CIA," said Marsha Dixon, 21, a senior majoring in government and English at Georgetown.
Like many in line, she said last month's attacks have influenced her career plans.
"After Sept. 11, everyone realizes intelligence is a really big factor in our lives," Dixon said.
The country, she added, "needs people doing this work.
"
Of course, many are also motivated by economic realities.
With the heady dot-com era over and employment opportunities in banking and other traditional sectors ebbing, intelligence work is one of the few growth fields.
"There's definitely a patriotic impulse" fueling interest in intelligence work, said Julia Pollock, 21, an economics major at American University who dropped her resume at the CIA table.
"But more than being able to do something meaningful," she said, "a lot of students are talking about how to get a job at all."
The soaring interest among job seekers has been a pleasant turnabout for intelligence agencies, particularly the CIA, which was reviled on college campuses in the 1970s and almost invisible to students in the '80s and '90s.
In fact, until recently, the CIA seemed to be crumbling from within, its ranks thinned by post-Cold War budget cuts and morale sapped by a series of spy scandals and other misadventures.
But the agency has been on a rebuilding push since 1998, when it began sending recruiters to dozens of campuses, ramped up its employment advertising budget substantially and even invested in piles of mugs, pins and T-shirts to dole out to potential recruits.
The effort has been paying off, said Anya Guilsher, a spokeswoman for the CIA.
The agency's latest graduating class was the largest ever--though she declined to say exactly how large--and included students fluent in 22 languages.
Among the languages were Farsi, Urdu, Vietnamese, Korean, Arabic and Chinese.
But there are also clear signs that the agency, which has roughly 16,000 employees, is still trying to fill major gaps.
Last week, the CIA posted on its Web site openings for people able to translate Arabic, Dari and Pashto--the predominant languages of Afghanistan.
Analysts saw this as a sign that the agency is still playing catch-up in the war on terrorism.
"With all of their thousands of new applicants, they have not yet filled some of their most elementary intelligence needs," said Steven Aftergood, an intelligence policy analyst at the Federation of American Scientists.
Other critics fear the agency will only squander the new talent it is beginning to attract.
Cannistraro, the former counter-terrorism chief, said the CIA typically loses up to 30% of its new recruits within a few years.
"
Especially the brighter ones," he said.
"This isn't what they want.
It's a bureaucracy, and parts of it are indistinguishable from the Department of Agriculture."
Other former CIA officers say the agency has adopted an increasingly conformist, politically correct culture that drives away the sort of maverick personalities willing to take on dangerous assignments.
One former officer pointed to an instance several years ago when the CIA had simultaneous openings in Athens and Copenhagen.
Athens, an active post in which officers are routinely exposed to danger, attracted no interest.
The Copenhagen position, considered cushier, attracted 18 applications.
"There's not enough people who are willing to go to the hellholes of the world," the former officer said, "and that's a regrettable result of the change in culture in the place."
Guilsher would not discuss that account, but she rejected the suggestion that the CIA has become risk-averse.
"There are men and women taking risks here every single day, and some of the work we do is very dangerous," she said.
"And our current engagement on the fight against terrorism is nothing short of all-out."
Guilsher said the agency is impressed overall with the caliber of the new crop of applicants.
Traditionally, about 20% of applicants warrant at least a follow-up phone call, and "that's still holding true," she said.
Aside from targeting recruits with expertise in the Middle East, the CIA is seeking chemists and biologists who can help the agency track the proliferation of anthrax and other biochemical weapons.
With the sudden surge in interest, the agency is increasingly picky.
Recruiters' faces lit up at the Georgetown job fair, however, when a 24-year-old James Madison University senior informed them that he was born in Afghanistan, is a U.S. citizen and speaks Farsi, Dari and Pashto.
"They said they'd call me in a day or two," the student said afterward.
He offered only his first name, Soloman, explaining that he wished to protect his identity "in case they send me over there."
   The bipartisan spirit that has dominated Congress since the Sept. 11 terrorist strikes is being strained, with clashes erupting between Democrats and Republicans over the economy, laid-off workers and other issues.
Fissures are opening between the two parties and also within each of them over measures aimed at reviving the stalled economy.
Against GOP opposition, Democrats want to add provisions helping laid-off aviation workers to airline security legislation.
Saying the money was needed to pay for war, Republicans muscled small domestic spending cuts through a divided House subcommittee Tuesday.
They have also applied pressure to accelerate work on energy legislation that many Democrats oppose.
In addition, partisan fights erupted this week over trade and government benefits for unmarried partners.
"The normal force of congressional gravity is a return to partisan bickering," said Marshall Wittmann, who studies Congress for the conservative Hudson Institute.
"The question is whether the leaders can prevent a free fall."
With the country focused on domestic security and possible U.S. military action abroad, party leaders have little taste for prolonged political combat.
Top lawmakers who usually speak infrequently now consult regularly in an effort to avoid House and Senate floor fights.
And relatively speedy action is still anticipated on airline security, anti-terrorism and routine spending bills.
The new comity produced a congressional authorization for the use of military force -- with just one dissenting vote -- and passage of a $40 billion package of emergency spending just three days after the deadly attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
"We're going to try to avoid political confrontation," Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D., said Wednesday.
Despite constant bipartisan meetings on the subject, perhaps the sternest test of unity is the effort to recharge an economy that many analysts think may sink into recession.
Top Republicans want to move quickly on economic recovery legislation; leading Democrats have expressed less urgency.
The GOP wants to ensure a healthy economy in time for the 2002 elections; Democrats -- while still seeking internal consensus -- fear the revival of budget deficits and constant cuts in federal programs.
Popular GOP ideas for reviving the economy include cutting the capital gains tax on investments and corporate income tax rates, allowing more generous deductions for business, and letting parts of this year's tax cut take effect earlier.
Many Democrats favor cutting Social Security and Medicare payroll taxes on low-income workers who pay no income tax, or sending them tax rebates; expanding unemployment benefits and federal health-care aid for the poor; and increasing spending for school construction, job training and public works.
Each side vehemently opposes many of the other's ideas.
"That's labor pork," House Majority Leader Dick Armey, R-Texas, said of Democratic spending proposals, referring to Democrats' union backers.
The GOP's push for tax cuts is "a pre-existing agenda," said Rep. Lloyd Doggett, D-Texas.
Ultimately, with both parties agreeing that budget constraints must take a back seat to battling terrorists, the economic package could bear everybody's proposals, driving the measure's price tag sky high.
"The easiest way to maintain bipartisan comity is to say yes to everything," said President Robert Reischauer of the liberal-leaning Urban Institute.
Democrats want $3.75 billion in financial aid, job training and health-care help for aviation industry workers added to airline security legislation.
Republicans oppose expanding the measure.
A House Ways and Means Committee subcommittee voted by party lines Tuesday for a GOP plan to erase planned spending increases for aiding victims of child abuse and children of prisoners.
Republicans said the military may need the money.
Senate Republicans tried amending a $343 billion defense bill Tuesday with energy legislation the Bush administration wants.
Democrats halted debate on the overall bill briefly, later promising committee action on the energy package by year's end.
U.S. Trade Representative Robert Zoellick said the terrorist attacks increased the need for congressional approval of expanded trade negotiating powers for Bush.
Democrats complained Zoellick was using the catastrophe to push a partisan measure. 
Just hours before huge battles erupted around the front line at Bagram air base, anti-Taliban Afghan fighters readied for a long fight with their enemy, vowing they were willing to die for their cause.
Above a fortified earthen bunker about 400 yards from Taliban positions, submachine-gun fire rang out in the evening air, in a prelude to the storm of fire that would erupt just after 9:20 p.m. following U.S. airstrikes on Afghan cities.
A bullet whistled by and hit a cement wall not far from the forward post, the position closest to the Taliban lines.
"Have a look out there," urged Havani, 28, a colonel in the opposition Northern Alliance and a seasoned moujahedeen.
"If you look long enough, they'll shoot you right in the middle of the forehead," he said, laughing and jabbing his finger toward the Taliban positions.
"Snipers," he explained.
On the long walk through exposed territory across the runway to the forward post, Havani had warned of possible gunfire.
"If they start shooting, dive into that trench," he said, indicating a shallow, narrow ditch about 10 yards away.
Havani pointed to the memorial of a commander killed while praying a few weeks ago.
Another soldier had been shot in the stomach only hours earlier.
He was taken in critical condition to an emergency hospital in the Panjsher Valley.
The Bagram airport technically is controlled by the opposition but is right on the front line.
Its tarmac is littered with aircraft shattered by fighting.
The atmosphere was tense as young Northern Alliance soldiers said they would be happy to sacrifice their lives in the coming battle to overrun the nearest Taliban village, about 400 yards away.
Havani outlined plans to storm the village and said he expected heavy casualties on his side.
"We'll open fire from here.
It will be suppressing and supportive fire, and the infantry soldiers will storm their positions, supported by artillery and tanks," he said.
"But they have tanks on that side too.
There will be a lot of casualties on our side.
Of course, those who are attacking always bear more casualties.
"
Havani too said he was "ready to die for the sake of freedom and for the sake of my country."
Wahid, a 22-year-old fighter under Havani, said he expected an enormous fight ahead.
"There is going to be a big change in this war.
Now the Taliban will be destroyed by the Americans.
The Taliban and terrorists will be wiped out," he said.
Behind the front line, moujahedeen with Kalashnikov assault rifles on their shoulders whizzed around on bicycles, the speediest and safest means of providing logistical support--ammunition, bread and water--to the fighters.
On the outskirts of Bagram, local people crowded foreigners begging for information about when the bombing would start.
Meanwhile, Northern Alliance officials outlined plans for a major attack on several fronts once the U.S. air campaign is over.
While their forces moved to reinforce front-line positions, generals said there would be about a week of airstrikes against targets around the capital, Kabul, nearby Jalalabad and the southern city of Kandahar.
Their initial information proved correct.
The Northern Alliance foreign minister, Abdullah, said shortly before the start of the airstrikes that he had received information from American sources that the strikes were about to begin.
"An attack is imminent.
It will take place very soon.
It will involve air bombardment and rocketing of the Taliban," Abdullah said.
"Our people are in constant contact with the Americans."
Indeed, airspace was closed in northern Afghanistan to clear the way for U.S. reconnaissance planes.
"The program is they will be bombing for a week.
Then they U.S. commanders will assess the damage and monitor troop and hardware movements.
Then they'll sum up the results of the operation, and they order us to attack," another senior Northern Alliance official said earlier Sunday.
"I was told overnight that it's a matter of a day or two, according to the signals they're giving us."
The Northern Alliance moved a group of its commanders into Jabal os Saraj, just south of the Panjsher Valley, on Sunday.
Commanders in the region and other officials had met late Saturday to finalize their plans.
"We were told before we had a week to wait.
Now they're telling us it could happen any time," said Gen. Abdul Basir, 36, commander of forces in the Salang Gorge.
"We are counting the minutes and seconds," said Gen. Del Agha Salangi, also 36.
"When flies fly around, we hope it's not flies we see, but planes."
In recent days, there has been a marked change in the rhetoric of Northern Alliance officials, who a week ago were expressing confidence that they could easily crush Taliban resistance and forge into Kabul.
Now they are talking about drawn-out battles against tough, fanatical fighters.
There were contradictory signals Sunday about plans to storm the capital.
Abdullah said it was not the alliance's main target.
"Kabul is not the priority for us.
The priority is to eradicate terrorism from Afghanistan, its bases and those who harbor terrorists," he said.
But later he spoke about pushing forward to Kabul.
Still, he said: "Going to Kabul is one thing.
Moving troops into Kabul is another."
He said targets around Kabul included air bases and fuel and ammunition depots.
Abdullah also said the Northern Alliance had expressed to U.S. officials its fears about the fate of civilians in Kabul.
"That's difficult, that's very difficult.
You're talking about more than a million people," he said.
Another front-line commander, Gen. Bobojan, commander of the forces at Bagram airport, said that Kabul was important but that there would be attacks elsewhere as well.
He said the Taliban's defenses would crumble more quickly if the U.S. continued pressure on Pakistan not to support the Taliban.
Bobojan said the regime was on alert, had added a second front line and had nearly 5,000 troops deployed in the area south of Bagram.
"We have Arabs on the front line here.
We have information that they beefed up their front-line positions with more personnel and hardware," he said.
Abdullah admitted that the Taliban might launch an offensive on the opposition once the U.S. campaign began.
"Some people in the Taliban might think that's a good idea once the strikes start," he said.
"But they're losing control of the situation every hour as the strikes near." 
Special correspondent Sergei L. Loiko contributed to this report.
In a campaign combining diplomacy, publicity and covert funding, the Bush administration is sending a last-minute message to tribal leaders inside Afghanistan: Abandon the Taliban or face American military force.
The U.S. objective, officials say, is to weaken or even topple the Taliban regime before the first shot in the war on terrorism is fired.
But so far, the results are uncertain.
"We haven't seen any sign in the past week of the kind of major shift we might hope for," acknowledged a State Department expert on Afghanistan.
The United States has delivered its message from the top, through President Bush, British Prime Minister Tony Blair and Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf, all of whom have warned in the past two days that the Taliban's days are numbered.
Officials say that the same message is also being conveyed more concretely on the ground through Pakistani officials and U.S. intelligence agents: Afghans who switch sides can count on money and other help from the United States, and perhaps even a place in a post-Taliban government, but those who stay with the Taliban should be ready to fight.
The Central Intelligence Agency "is doing a lot of hard work to persuade people in Afghanistan to reconsider their chosen path," one official said.
"We hope it succeeds."
He refused to provide details, but several officials acknowledged that the CIA has been authorized to offer money and support to would-be defectors from the Taliban side.
"Bribing people to defect from one side to another has been going on for a long time in Afghanistan, and the same process is going on now," one official said.
The United States and Pakistan are focusing on two key groups: possible "moderate" elements within the militant Taliban movement and traditional tribal leaders who have supported the Taliban as a matter of convenience more than ideology.
"There has always been a division between the mullahs Muslim clergy who are the Taliban's main base of support and the traditional leaders," the State Department official said.
Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld, in an interview with ABC television, said he saw signs of a split at the heart of the Taliban regime.
"There are . . .
factions within the Taliban that disagree with Mullah Mohammed Omar and the Taliban leadership with respect to its coddling and assisting of the al Qaeda terrorist group," Rumsfeld said.
"So there are factions within factions, and certainly it's our interest to see that the factions that are in favor of the Afghan people and who are against international terrorism are the ones that prevail."
But other officials warned that the evidence of internal division within the regime was far from clear.
"The signs point in every possible direction," said one.
"There are indeed signs of cracks and fissures, but nothing you'd call a crevasse.
We don't take too much comfort from that.
When a regime is under pressure, you expect to see some cracks."
In Islamabad, Pakistani officials said they were trying to persuade moderate elements of the Taliban government either to defect or to meet the U.S. demand to surrender terrorist leader Osama bin Laden and his aides.
"One way or another, we need to convey to the moderate Taliban where Bin Laden stands," a high-ranking Pakistani source said after U.S. Ambassador Wendy Chamberlin presented Musharraf with evidence of the case against the terrorist.
Future exchanges with Taliban officials, he said, would "reflect our understanding of the evidence.
"
Pakistan in recent days has helped to identify several dozen figures in the Taliban government and the Afghan diaspora who might be of use in forming a new post-Taliban government, the same source said, adding that efforts to identify a possible alternative government to the Taliban were accelerating.
The United States has supported a joint effort by Afghanistan's 86-year-old exiled king, Mohammed Zahir Shah, and the country's main opposition force, the Northern Alliance, to form a new government.
The Northern Alliance, also known as the United Front, and the former monarch agreed Monday to name a 120-member Supreme Council for National Unity representing all Afghan tribes and ethnic groups, and call it into session in Rome by the end of the month.
But the effort faces several problems.
The Northern Alliance is made up almost entirely of Tajiks and other northern ethnic groups, traditional rivals to the Pushtuns, who are the Taliban's base of support.
The king and many of the exile groups that support him have been in only intermittent touch with people inside the country.
That's why the United States and Pakistan are now focusing on groups inside Taliban-ruled areas, like the tribal leaders.
But the Taliban, apparently recognizing its potential political vulnerability, has already moved to shore up support.
On Monday, the Taliban announced a power-sharing deal that would give government positions to representatives of minority southern tribes in several strategic border provinces.
"It's probably a mistake to talk about the Taliban in categories like moderate and radical," said Paula R. Newberg, a South Asia expert and United Nations consultant.
"The more significant factor is likely to be the border tribes whose job it has been for decades to mediate" between the interior and the outside world.
Newberg said U.S. efforts to woo defectors may suffer from the view held by many Afghans that the United States, which supported their fight against the Soviet Union in the 1980s, lost interest in their country once the Soviets were gone.
"The United States is trying to communicate to people who might be thinking about jumping ship that there's a place for them to jump to," she said.
"But it's not clear that these people will see the United States as the most reliable ally."   
McManus reported from Washington and Daniszewski from Islamabad.
Amid concerns about safety and delays, more senior business executives are expected to bypass major airlines for corporate jets and charters.
Although still prohibitively expensive for many firms, the use of corporate aircraft and charters has risen steadily in recent years as companies have reacted to airline fare increases and perceived service cutbacks.
The Sept. 11 terrorist attacks involving four hijacked planes are expected to quicken that pace.
Several charter and private jet services said they already have seen an increase in business.
"My educated guess is that there will be a noticeable, measurable increase in the use of private planes and that it will be able to be linked to this tragedy," said Kevin Mitchell, chairman of the Business Travel Coalition, a Pennsylvania-based advocacy group.
"There's always been a security concern with corporations about their senior managers," he said.
"Sept. 11 just pushed that off the chart."
For costs ranging from millions of dollars for sole ownership of a new jet to $5,000 an hour for a charter, companies can purchase the peace of mind of knowing who's on board, what's in the luggage and who's piloting the aircraft.
And, with commercial air travelers now advised to allow at least two hours to board a domestic flight, passengers on private jets are buying time.
Mitchell and others acknowledged that commercial airlines--which were looking at more than $2 billion in losses before the terrorist attacks--will continue to control most business travel.
"To suggest that this is going to have a substantial impact on the airlines, no I don't think so," said Betsy O'Rourke, senior vice president of the Travel Industry Assn.
Although the number of defectors may be small, they are expected to come from the class of traveler
the airlines covet most--first-class and business-class passengers whose tickets provide airlines with their highest yields.
"The business they are losing is the CEOs, the CFOs, the executive VPs," Mitchell said.
"The fliers with a high impact on the bottom line, that's who they're losing.
That's the trend, and it's strong.
And Sept. 11 just made it stronger."
At Petersen Aviation in Van Nuys, flight standards manager Thomas C. Mangum said charter business has picked up, boosted by new clients and travelers returning home after the suspension of air travel was lifted.
He said business is so brisk that the company may need to hire additional crews.
"The industry in general had been in a slump" because of the slowing economy, Mangum said.
"Activity was in a downturn on the order of 15%.
"I suspect we'll gain that back
and then some," he said.
The charter business is one of two areas that experts expect to increase rapidly as a result of the attacks.
The other is the fast-growing segment called fractional ownership, in which buyers purchase use of an aircraft for a set number of hours a year.
They also pay monthly management fees and an occupied hourly fee.
The lure, experts say, is the price point.
Though a new Cessna Citation V Ultra costs about $6.5 million, a one-sixteenth share costs $400,000 at New Jersey-based Executive Jet , the largest of the fractional ownership companies.
Owned by billionaire investor Warren Buffett, the company operates 260 aircraft, and has increased its fleet by about 25% a year over the last several years to accommodate growing demand.
Figures from the National Business Aviation Assn. show that the number of owners of fractional aircraft shares nationwide rose to 3,694 last year from 285 in 1995.
United Airlines Inc., concerned about the flow of first-class passengers to business jets, this year became the first major airline to move into the private-jet business.
Analysts are split on whether increased interest in private air travel will translate into more business for aircraft manufacturers, especially market leaders Raytheon Aircraft (which makes the Hawker series) and Cessna Aircraft Co., both based in Kansas; and Montreal-based Bombardier Inc., which makes the Learjet.
Gulfstream Aerospace Corp., which has 60% of the market for large, long-range business aircraft, said it has seen increased interest since the attacks.
Executives of Raytheon, Cessna and Bombardier declined to comment.
Still, one analyst said anticipated growth in private air travel could mean enough new orders for manufacturers--especially of larger planes--to forestall a slowdown that had been forecast for the end of the year.
"Activity throughout the industry had been at a high level a year ago and was expected to drop, with demand continuing to weaken over the next few months," said Paul Nisbet of Rhode Island-based JSA Research Inc., which specializes in U.S.-based aerospace.
"This could be a partially off-setting factor," he said.
But Byron Callan, an aerospace/defense analyst with Merrill Lynch said that, with the economy poised for further slowing, any gains manufacturers would get from new clients could be diminished by current corporate jet owners bailing out to help improve the bottom line.
David Ramirez, who heads Perez Electric in Walnut, said a private business plane doesn't have to be a $10-million beauty.
In July 2000, Ramirez bought a 1973 Cessna twin-engine plane, "because that's all I could afford."
It cost him $230,000, and he said it will help him pursue $1.5 million worth of business in Arizona this year.
"For my business, it's very important," said Ramirez, who also is the pilot.
"We do electrical installations, traffic signals, street lighting.
I can't fly commercial and take my tools."
That's a factor more travelers may have to consider because of the increased security on commercial flights.
Before the terrorist attacks, security was a secondary motivation for using a private plane--behind convenience--for some companies.
Today, one pilot said, that order is reversed.
"Security, we had almost taken it for granted," said Bill Sparks, chief pilot for Tulsa, Okla.-based Helmerich & Payne Inc., an oil and gas drilling and production company that spent $9 million on a new mid-size Learjet in July 2000.
"Prior to this event, I'd say it was 30% of the equation.
The convenience of it weighed a lot more.
"After the World Trade Center, a top manager here might assign a lot more value to security," he said.
"It's maybe now 70% to 80% of the equation."
Although the Federal Aviation Administration issued a lengthy list of safety precautions before allowing commercial planes back in the air, general aviation is operating under fewer new restrictions, FAA spokesman William Shumann said.
Even without FAA action, however, officials within the private aviation industry said they've taken steps to beef up security, including checking passenger IDs, maintaining detailed passenger lists and tagging all luggage.
Such measures can be touted as additional rationale for businesses to make the switch.
"This tragedy is going to make an even stronger case for personal ownership or fractional ownership," said Steven Brechter, chief operating officer of Executive Jet.
"We've already seen it," he said.
"People who were on the fence have been calling to sign up.
At least a dozen.
This has really shaken people up."
As sales of used planes and fractional ownership shares extend beyond "high-net-worth individuals," the industry could shake the image of the fat-cat business honcho who uses the company plane to go skiing.
"Business jets used to be the dirty little secret," said Callan of Merrill Lynch.
"We're well past those days.
I've talked to shareholders and they don't object," to their executives' use of private aircraft.
"If I'm a shareholder, I want my management at work, not enduring horrific delays at an airport," he said. 
Now that the United States and Osama bin Laden have publicly declared war on each other, the question becomes: What's next?
The answer reflects the difficulty of dealing with the kind of low-intensity conflict that has redefined warfare in the post-Cold War world.
The threat posed by Bin Laden, the millionaire Saudi dissident linked to the Aug. 7 embassy bombings in East Africa, is expected to be far more amorphous--and thus in some ways more dangerous--than those presented by traditional conflicts with defined front lines, conventional weapons and identifiable troops.
The range of targets is likely to be much wider.
The weapons will be more imaginative but no less potent, as shown by the grisly scenes in Kenya and Tanzania earlier this month.
The time frame, stretching over the coming weeks, months and perhaps years, is likely to be looser and more unpredictable.
And even who is winning or losing might be difficult to tell.
"It'll be a war that is often without tangible victories," said Bruce Hoffman, author of "Inside Terrorism" and director of Scotland's Center for the Study of Terrorism and Political Violence.
The U.S. fully joined the war last week with missile attacks against alleged Bin Laden camps in Afghanistan and a suspected chemical weapons plant in Sudan.
But the U.S. still confronts what appears to be an extensive Bin Laden network, operating under a new umbrella called the International Islamic Front for Jihad Against Jews and Crusaders, that is hard to pinpoint and looks different even from past patterns of terrorism.
"When terrorism first emerged in the late 1960s, the groups were self-contained entities, so eliminating the group or its issue solved the problem," Hoffman said.
Later, when state-sponsored terrorism increased, the U.S. could retaliate by arresting the terrorists or punishing the state.
"But in the 1990s, terrorism has become a mass movement defined by a constellation of people with similar religious beliefs who operate globally," he said.
The new war with the suspected Bin Laden network may well serve as the kind of test case for international cooperation against terrorism that 1991's Operation Desert Storm was for such cooperation in a conventional war.
Bin Laden's preferred targets might still be official American diplomatic and military installations, but virtually any U.S. site or citizen abroad is a potential target.
"Targets are likely to be quite indiscriminate," said Robert B. Oakley, a former ambassador to Pakistan and a Reagan administration official in charge of South Asia policy.
The fortification of American embassies, military bases and other official facilities might force Bin Laden and his allies to look for people, businesses, schools, cultural organizations and other nonofficial targets that are more vulnerable, experts say.
"The places to look are those where the United States has some kind of presence and Bin Laden's people also have direct or indirect connections.
They may not always be obvious, as in the case of Kenya and Tanzania," Oakley said.
With heightened security at home, U.S. analysts think an attack inside the United States is less likely--at least at this point.
"The primary dangers are abroad," said L. Paul Bremer III, former head of the State Department's Office of Counterterrorism and now with Kissinger Associates.
"
But attacks against the United States shouldn't be excluded, since Bin Laden was involved one way or another with the World Trade Center bombers."
On Friday, Bin Laden pledged he would strike at U.S. interests again, leading counter-terrorism specialists to expect a revenge attack.
"In the next couple of weeks to a month, there will be a heightened threat from Bin Laden, the groups that he supports that have not been damaged or are outside Afghanistan, and other like-minded terrorists in the Mideast," Bremer predicted.
But Bin Laden has great flexibility in terms of timing.
While the U.S. must maintain readiness full time, he can strike at will.
He can afford to wait until the shock of the East African bombings wears off and the U.S. guard is lower.
The Clinton administration acknowledges that this war is unlikely to end as quickly as Operation Desert Storm.
Friday after briefing Congress.
The use of military force is unlikely to provide the kind of conclusive resolution expected in a conventional war.
"No one should have illusions about military force getting us out ahead.
It's hard to find good targets that are directly applicable," Oakley said.
The area targeted by U.S. missiles south of the Afghan capital, Kabul, on Thursday was also the site of intensive aerial attacks and infantry battles during the Soviet war in Afghanistan, said Milton Bearden, who ran the U.S. covert operation in Afghanistan for six years.
U.S. warships can launch Tomahawk cruise missiles "until the national Treasury runs dry" and still have no guarantee that Bin Laden's operation will be permanently crippled, Bearden added.
Hoffman said that missiles provide an "opening salvo" without a lasting solution. "
To combat this kind of warfare will require a completely different conception of warfare than we've had for the past century."
The United States will also need significant assistance from other key countries, including Muslim governments.
"We don't win wars without allies," Bearden said.
Americans should have no illusions about a dramatic Delta Force or Navy SEAL operation to nab Bin Laden and remove the threat he poses.
Experts agree that such an operation probably is not doable--at least without an unacceptable cost in human life. "
Only in the movies," one former intelligence official said.
Others compare the difficulty of responding to terrorism to the problems of the Vietnam War.
"The Vietnam War was so difficult because the enemy didn't wear uniforms, we didn't know the targets, and virtually everyplace was vulnerable.
This is Vietnam on a global scale," said Patricia Schroeder, a former member of the House Armed Services Committee.
At the same time, the extent of the threat can be exaggerated.
While the images and death toll from the twin bombings in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam were anguishing, the dangers from terrorism might be less extensive than in the 1980s because the number of terrorist groups has decreased, even among Islamic militants.
"The old-line Palestinian extremists of the 1970s and 1980s are not a factor anymore.
And around the world, there's been significant progress isolating or eliminating terrorists in Ireland, Spain, Peru and elsewhere," Bremer said.
"Those are pluses.
It's not a totally bad picture out there anymore."
Security:
White House urges news executives to deliberate before airing tapes, saying they could contain secret messages to terrorists.
The White House asked television networks Wednesday to use caution in carrying unedited videos of Osama bin Laden because they are unfiltered propaganda and may send coded instruction to his operatives. 
President Bush's national security advisor, Condoleezza Rice, made the request in a conference call with top officials of broadcast and cable networks. 
Promising to curb Bin Laden's seemingly unfettered access to American television screens, network executives pledged to review all video before airing it. 
Soon after the United States began striking targets in Afghanistan on Sunday, networks displayed a video that was reportedly delivered to the Kabul office of Al Jazeera television, an independent Middle Eastern cable network.
A Bin Laden spokesman has also been shown on American television. 
"At best, Osama bin Laden's message is propaganda calling on people to kill Americans," White House press secretary Ari Fleischer said.
"At worst, he could be issuing orders to his followers to initiate such attacks." 
The White House concern is that the Islamic fundamentalist or his organization, Al Qaeda, may have planted followers in the United States or elsewhere some time ago, and that his statements may be giving them instructions to begin new operations. 
"People are analyzing that now," Fleischer said.
"There are no easy conclusions to reach." 
He added that communications links out of Afghanistan are limited and one way for Bin Laden to reach his followers beyond that country "is through Western media." 
Privately, intelligence sources said Al Qaeda frequently uses such tactics.
Videotapes in which Bin Laden speaks have been made public before each of the past three terrorist attacks attributed to Al Qaeda.
Each attack killed Americans. 
"It is something we are extremely concerned about," said a Bush administration official who spoke on condition of anonymity.
"It is no coincidence that the release of a Bin Laden video is subsequently followed by a terrorist attack." 
He said such videos were released before terrorists bombed two U.S. embassies in East Africa in 1998 and attacked the warship Cole last year in the port of Aden, Yemen.
And Bin Laden released a "training video" this summer, before the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. 
"This one may be no different," the official said of the video that came out Sunday but appeared to have been taped before the bombing began. 
The message could have been in the words themselves--"saying now is a good time to attack," the Bush aide said.
But administration officials also fear that Bin Laden and his aides may have been sending a signal by what he wore--combat fatigues--or where he was taped. 
Officials said each Bin Laden tape is being compared with others and the terrorist actions that followed, to search out a pattern or code. 
Intelligence and law enforcement officials have given special scrutiny to the video released this summer to see whether it launched last month's attacks.
In addition, the Bush aide said, people who have been taken into custody who may have played a role in those attacks have been asked whether the video contained a message.
He would not say what, if anything, those being questioned had said. 
During World War II, governments used the news media to send coded messages--and listened to the enemy's reports for clues. 
"The most famous example was the BBC French service," said David Isby, author of several books on Afghanistan and the Taliban.
He said the British newscasts included phrases or sentences that were meaningful as codes to Resistance cells fighting the Nazis. 
Rice called the network executives about 6 a.m. PDT.
She spoke for about 30 minutes with the presidents of the news divisions at ABC, CBS and NBC and the chairmen of CNN and Fox News. 
The TV news organizations said in similar statements that their top executives had agreed to stop airing video from Bin Laden or other Al Qaeda spokesmen without judging whether it was newsworthy. 
Executives, who described the conference call as cordial, said material they televise was likely to be highly edited or paraphrased. 
"If there's no news value, it may not air at all," said Neal Shapiro, president of NBC News. 
But he and other TV news executives stopped short of saying they would never air such video.
Shapiro cited one hypothetical example--pictures of Bin Laden walking in a bomb crater--as material that might be important enough to display. 
"It's going to be case by case, day by day, situation by situation," said Erik Sorenson, president of MSNBC. 
Bin Laden's first statement on Sunday was widely televised almost as soon as it was disseminated by Al Jazeera.
The networks said at the time that they did not know where or when it was taped.
A second statement from Bin Laden's organization Tuesday also received wide distribution.
But it prompted more scrutiny. 
Fox started televising it without reviewing it, but cut it off after about 20 seconds.
At MSNBC, after the statement ran without screening, Sorenson said he changed the network's policy. 
"These people are terrorists; this is not an official government," he said.
"We have added problems with these releases because they are coming to us third-hand from Al Jazeera.
While I have a certain level of respect for Al Jazeera, I don't allow other news organizations to vet our journalism for us." 
Some networks had already wondered whether the tapes contained embedded or coded messages; indeed, MSNBC televised a discussion of that possibility this week. 
Network executives and the White House described Rice's presentation not as a request to stop broadcasting the messages but as a request that they consider the content before automatically carrying them. 
"In fact, Dr. Rice acknowledged the potential importance of messages and other appearances by Bin Laden," CBS News said in a statement.
"She did ask the networks to keep national security in mind while exercising their independent news judgment." 
Andrew Heyward, president of CBS News, said Rice's focus was less on the potential of coded messages and more on the unfiltered access to American television screens that the networks were giving to "sworn enemies of the United States exhorting terrorists to kill more Americans." 
The administration's request raised questions about the responsibility of the news media to censor itself, as well as questions about whether the administration was masking its desire to limit Bin Laden's efforts to spread his message regardless of the operational impact it has. 
Sanford J. Ungar, former director of Voice of America and president of Goucher College in Baltimore, urged caution in exercising self-censorship because it could lead to greater pressure from the government to restrict news coverage. 
"Once the camel's nose is in the tent, the rest is sure to follow.
What will be the next demand?
" he asked. 
The White House limited its specific request to television networks.
But Fleischer said his account of Rice's call could influence other media, such as Internet sites capable of carrying video. 
The Bin Laden video is posted on the Los Angeles Times Web site.
Joseph M. Russin, assistant managing editor, said: "The tape had been played repeatedly on television, and we felt it had significant news value." 
Merrill Brown, editor in chief of the popular news Web site MSNBC.com, said his bosses had not asked him to hold off distributing video of Bin Laden. 
He said that his Web site serves an international audience and that it would be unthinkable to base his news judgments only on expressions from U.S. officials. 
"We are the international arm of NBC News and anybody anywhere in the world with a phone connection can look at our streaming videos on demand.
The Web changes the dynamic here," he said.    
Gerstenzang and Meyer reported from Washington and Jensen reported from New York.
Times staff writers Norman Kempster, Jube Shiver and Marisa Schultz also contributed to this report.
Afghans:
Ex-resistance fighter gathers 800 leaders to weigh proposal for an interim government in Kabul.
The most significant achievement of a gathering here Wednesday of 800 Afghan leaders, politicians and clerics--most supporters of exiled monarch Mohammad Zaher Shah and opponents of the Taliban regime--was that it was held at all. 
Rallies by Afghan political groups have long been banned in this dusty frontier city bulging with more than 700,000 refugees.
Since the Taliban movement swept into power in neighboring Afghanistan five years ago, those who spoke out against the fundamentalist Islamic regime have faced arrest and deportation by the pro-Taliban Pakistani government. 
But in a sign of the changed political climate here, Pir Sayed Ahmad Gailani stood on the stage of the overflowing 680-seat Nishtar Hall on Wednesday and called for a new political order to replace the Taliban. 
Gailani, an aristocratic former Afghan resistance leader whose flagging political career has been revived by recent events, outlined a political program that would include the creation of what he called a "leadership council" of eight to 12 elders and representatives of the major Afghan ethnic groups and political units. 
It is unclear how much support Gailani has for his governing plan, which is considerably different from one put forward by the former monarch. 
In fact, somewhat surprisingly, no representatives of the former king attended the two-day meeting, which is scheduled to conclude today with a consensus resolution outlining a general direction for Afghanistan's future. 
Hamid Sidig, a spokesman for the exiled king, said he had no information on exactly what the meeting in Peshawar is about.
"If he's doing this to support the process, then it's welcome," Sidig said.
"If it's something different, we don't know about it." 
Despite the apparent lack of consensus, the meeting here was the biggest so far in a series of gatherings aimed at developing a broad, united base of support for a Zaher Shah-led interim government in Afghanistan.
Another smaller meeting was held Wednesday in Nicosia, Cyprus.
Another is tentatively planned for Istanbul, Turkey. 
As Gailani described his plan, the compact leadership body would have executive power over a Cabinet of professional managers and technocrats that would function as the Afghan government under protection of U.N. security forces until a more traditional ruling council, or loya jirga, could be convened. 
The Gailani proposal has the advantage of being more manageable and easier to put in place than the much larger, 120-member Supreme Council that has been proposed by Zaher Shah and endorsed by the Northern Alliance opposition force that is battling the Taliban in northern Afghanistan. 
Under the king's plan, the Supreme Council would serve as a nominating board for an even larger loya jirga. 
The uncertainty over a postTaliban government comes against the backdrop of increased concern that diplomatic and political efforts to construct a new Afghan political structure are lagging behind the events on the battlefront. 
Gailani had hoped that the Peshawar meeting would attract a broad spectrum of Afghans from inside and outside the country, to produce a credible alternative to the Taliban. 
But organizers were disappointed that there was no official delegation from the exiled king. "
Everyone here supports the king," said Gailani's son Hamid, who serves as his interpreter and political advisor.
"I don't know why they didn't send a representative." 
Also conspicuously absent were several key former moujahedeen commanders, notably Peshawar-based legendary fighter Abdul Haq.
His older brother, Haji Din Mohammed, did attend, taking a position among 50 senior leaders on the meeting hall stage. 
Even more important for a meeting that was supposed to unite Afghans under the banner of Gailani's organization, the Assn.
for Peace and National Unity of Afghanistan, there was no representative from the Northern Alliance. 
Possibly intimidated by recent Taliban reprisals against opposition groups, only a handful of people arrived here from inside Afghanistan.
In the northern Afghan city of Mazar-i-Sharif last week, the Taliban reportedly hanged five opposition leaders as "spies." 
Huge divisions remain in the Afghan community, particularly between the Tajik- and Uzbek-dominated Northern Alliance and the largely ethnic Pushtun groups here.
The Taliban draws much of its support from the Pushtuns, who constitute the largest ethnic group in Afghanistan. 
"There is still no coordination among all the people who are working for the king," said Rahimullah Yusufzai, a journalist and expert on Afghanistan.
"We have yet to see a joint rally of all the groups in support of the king." 
Wednesday's meeting in Peshawar may have been more of a departure for Pakistan than it was for the Afghans. 
Bending to international pressure, Pakistan dropped its support for the Taliban after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on the United States.
Exiled Afghans were invited back, and Pakistani authorities have recently warmed to the idea of a new political order organized under the largely symbolic agency of the 87-year-old former king. 
"It shows a major shift in Pakistan's Afghan policy," Yusufzai said.
"Before this, meetings against the Taliban or in support of the king could not be held." 
Significantly, Yusufzai said the monarchists and anti-Taliban elements are now free to organize opposition and resistance forces in many refugee camps that surround this city. 
"I expect more such meetings," Yusufzai said, "and they will now be allowed to work in the camps." 
At the Nishtar Hall, speaker after speaker rose from the crowd that overflowed into the aisles to announce support for the deposed king, who was exiled in 1973 and lives outside Rome.
One of the speakers, Azi Amin Waqad, exhorted the mostly turbaned Pushtun audience to join hands and chant: "God is Great.
God is Great.
We want peace in Afghanistan." 
Some of the speakers endorsed Zaher Shah's call for a U.N. security force, drawn from Muslim countries, to patrol the streets of Kabul, the Afghan capital.
Gailani asked that the U.N. protection be extended to other major Afghan cities.
Nearly all those who spoke condemned the U.S. air attacks on their country and the mounting civilian casualties.  
Times staff writer Richard Boudreaux in Rome contributed to this report.
Associated Press CHICAGO -- President Bush sought to coax Americans back onto airplanes today by putting the federal government in charge of airport security and pledging $500 million to upgrade security features on airplanes in hopes of thwarting future hijackings.
Bush urged governors to call up National Guard units to protect U.S. airports while he implements a long-term airline security plan.
"Get on the airlines, get about the business of America," Bush told hundreds of flag-waving airline workers at O'Hare International Airport.
Two jets were parked nose-to-nose at the event-- one each from United Airlines and American Airlines, the carriers hijacked two weeks ago.
The attacks left nearly 7,000 dead or missing.
Bush found a message in the two corporate logos: "America is united!"
he said.
"We are united in bringing justice to those folks who did the evil deed on Sept. 11."
As he spoke, departing jets roared overhead.
"We will not surrender our freedom to travel.
We will not surrender our freedoms in America," Bush said, his voice rising to a shout.
"You may think you have struck our soul, you haven't touched it!"
Terrorists hijacked four airplanes Sept. 11, crashing two into the World Trade Center in New York and one into the Pentagon outside Washington.
A fourth crashed in Pennsylvania, apparently after passengers struggled with the hijackers.
U.S. air travel has dropped sharply since the attacks.
"The American people are going to get back on your airplanes.
They will, believe me, they'll be back on your planes," said Illinois Gov. George Ryan.
"I want to encourage people to take that business trip or the long-awaited vacation they have planned," said Chicago Mayor Richard Daley, drawing a roar of appreciation from the workers.
Bush said he would invest in technologies that allow pilots to monitor passenger cabins by video camera, and let control towers take over "distressed" aircraft by remote control.
"Fully implementing the extensive security proposal may take four to six months," the White House statement said.
"During that time, the president will help ensure that every airport has a strong security presence by asking the governors of the 50 states to call up the National Guard-- at the federal government's expense-- to augment existing security staff at every commercial airport nationwide."
White House officials said Bush also hopes to reopen Reagan National Airport outside Washington, the only airport still closed due to the Sept. 11 attacks, but is not yet convinced that flying there would be safe, aides said.
Bush's plan does not include arming pilots, action requested by the pilots themselves.
"There may be better ways to do it than that, but I'm open for any suggestion," Bush said Wednesday, as aides privately confirmed that he is cool to the idea.
Continuing the parade of world leaders in Washington, Jordan's King Abdullah II was meeting with Secretary of State Colin Powell today.
Abdullah will see Bush Friday.
The king is expected to advocate a measured response to the attacks to avoid aggravating an already tense Middle East situation and launching the world into a larger conflict.
Amid the swirl of diplomacy, Jesse Jackson said he was considering whether to accept an invitation from the ruling militia in Afghanistan to take a "peace delegation" to neighboring Pakistan.
Bush advisers quietly urged the civil rights leader not to go and the Taliban said it had not invited him.
One of the government's biggest challenges at home is to make people believe it is safe to fly again.
Transportation Secretary Norman Mineta flew to Chicago aboard a commercial flight to demonstrate his confidence in the air system.
He was accompanied by Jane Garvey, head of the Federal Aviation Administration.
Mineta waited in a long line at a BWI security checkpoint.
He placed a leather bag on a scanner's conveyor belt, took out his keys and walked through the metal detector.
It beeped, prompting a security guard to give Mineta a thorough sweep with a hand-held detector before allowing him onto Concourse A.Mineta called the system safe, secure and stable.
Bush's father, the nation's 41st president, boarded a commercial flight in Boston for a trip to Houston, accompanied by several Secret Service agents.
White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said the number of commercial flights each day had returned to near normal, now at about 5,500, compared with the maximum before the attacks of 6,500.
However, relatively few people are on those flights.
Delta Air Lines, for example, says its planes typically are only 35 percent filled.
Meanwhile, a Pentagon official signaled that a military strike in Afghanistan against bin Laden and his Al Qaeda network was not imminent.
"I think it can't be stressed enough that everybody who's waiting for military action ... needs to rethink this thing," Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz told NATO allies in Brussels, Belgium, on Wednesday.
On the investigative front, 10 people were arrested on charges of illegally obtaining licenses to haul hazardous materials.
The move came a day after the Justice Department warned that terrorists might be planning a strike using chemical or biological weapons.
The arrests were made in Missouri, Michigan and Washington state.
Authorities said as many as 20 people had the bogus permits, some of whom may have connections to the 19 hijackers involved in the terrorist attacks.
It was too early to tell whether any of those arrested were connected to the Sept. 11 attacks, Justice Department spokeswoman Susan Dryden said.
Those arrested got the licenses from the state of Pennsylvania.
According to court records, a driver's license examiner in Pittsburgh provided permits to people who didn't take required tests, had suspended licenses or were otherwise not eligible.
Across the globe, authorities continued to crack down on terror suspects.
In Spain, police detained six Algerians allegedly linked to bin Laden, the exiled Saudi millionaire who is the chief suspect in the U.S. terror attacks.
In Britain, authorities captured a French citizen alleged to have been involved in a plot to attack U.S. interests in Europe.
In France, seven suspects in the case are under formal investigation, a step before being charged.
There were protests overnight against military action or the United States in Indonesia, Malaysia and Japan. 
The emergency excavation of a 500-year-old cemetery under a Lima shantytown has produced the largest trove of Inca mummies ever discovered in Peru--a finding that already is changing established views of Inca society.
Archeologists have unearthed more than 2,200 remarkably well-preserved mummies, some in bundles containing as many as seven individuals.
The find includes some 60,000 artifacts--including textiles, wooden implements, pottery and burial gifts--that will provide a wealth of new information about the short-lived Inca empire.
The finding dwarfs previous discoveries in Peru, which have produced only handfuls of mummies from any one site.
"This is a fabulous find, in part because of the extraordinary preservation of the mummy bundles and in part because it is such a large sample," said archeologist Christopher P. Donnan of UCLA, who was not involved in the excavation effort.
"We really don't have anything comparable to it."
The sprawling 20-acre cemetery was a central burial site for the Inca people from about AD 1480 to 1533, when Spanish fortune hunter Francisco Pizarro and his troops--and cannons--destroyed the fledgling empire.
The mummies and artifacts at the site, called Puruchuco-Huaquerones, were in imminent danger because peasants who have fled to the shantytown in recent years to escape guerrilla warfare in Peru's highlands are dumping as much as 60,000 gallons of sewage and other liquids onto the bone-dry soil every day.
The moisture is destroying the buried bodies and other organic materials that were preserved for five centuries by desiccation and the arid climate.
"If we had started five years from now, we would have found only bones," said Peruvian archeologist Guillermo "Willy" Cock, who led the excavations.
Cock, 48, is a graduate student at UCLA and a research associate at the school's Fowler Museum of Cultural History.
As it is, the team was able to retrieve only a fraction of the mummies buried at the site before running out of time and money.
In the last areas where they excavated, Cock said, the mummies were decomposing "with worms and insects, as if they had died 45 days before, not 500 years before. . . .
It was not a pretty sight."
The finds were revealed Wednesday in a news conference at the National Geographic Society, which provided emergency funds to carry out the excavation.
The excavation will be featured in the May National Geographic magazine and in a May 15 television special on PBS.
Further information is also available online at www.nationalgeographic.com/inca.
The discovery is particularly valuable because it includes a cross-section of Inca society, from crude peasant burials to the elaborate mummies of the elite.
And unlike elite mummies from most previous excavations, these have not been pillaged by looters.
As the findings are cataloged and studied, "we are going to rewrite Inca history," Cock said.
Because of the press of excavation, the team so far has opened only three of the mummy bundles.
But already, the finds "are telling some amazing stories," Cock said.
Some of the pottery from the burials, for example, comes from hundreds of miles to the north and south of Lima, indicating that the Inca empire was more highly integrated than researchers had previously believed.
"We always thought that they were in a structure imposed over local ethnic groups by the ruling Inca and that the people in general were not integrating Inca culture into their everyday lives," Cock said.
"What we have found is evidence of the opposite.
The common people were becoming a part of the Inca society, rather than being kept marginal, as was assumed.
"Ethnic differences were disappearing, perhaps for the first time," he added.
"In modern terms, they were developing a sense of nation."
But the intrusion of the Spanish cut that effort short, Cock added.
"There was not enough time to integrate the entire country."
Individual skeletons disturbed by looters or by construction are also being studied.
"That's already shedding light on the diet and general health conditions of the population," Donnan said.
"There's clear evidence of malnutrition among some of the children."
Researchers do not yet understand what led to the malnutrition or what it implies about Inca society.
Cock's team was able to excavate only in the streets of the shantytown and in other open spaces, such as the local schoolyard.
The team needed to build bridges over the trenched streets so that peasants could cross in front of their homes.
Many of the locals were hired to work on the project.
Cock estimates that the team was able to extract only about 20% of the mummies in the cemetery.
The rest are under houses and other structures and are rapidly being destroyed by the influx of water.
The remaining mummies cannot be recovered, Cock said at the news conference.
The researchers have exhausted their financial resources, and the 1,240 families of the shantytown have secured permission to remain on the site.
"Having to walk away is frustrating," he said.
"What's left may have been a huge contribution to knowledge of the Inca."
But what was removed will also have a massive impact, said other experts.
"What's most important is the tremendous size of the collection, 2,200 bodies," said archeologist John W. Verano of Tulane University, who, like Donnan, was not involved in the rescue effort.
"For an archeological site in South America, that is a huge sample.
"That's significant because you can say so much more if you have a large representative sample of the burial population.
You can talk about mortality patterns, life expectancy, burial practices, health, disease, causes of death, etc."
Some of the mummy bundles weigh hundreds of pounds and hold as many as seven individuals, along with their possessions.
The simplest bundles have wrappings of elaborate textiles around an individual and his possessions.
In others, the individual mummies are separated from each other with stuffing, then the entire bundle is enclosed in textiles and often, on top of that, an elaborate net made of rope.
One bundle, christened the Cotton King, was made up of 300 pounds of raw cotton.
Inside was the body of an Inca noble and a baby, probably related.
They were accompanied by 70 items, including food, pottery, animal skins and corn to make a fermented drink called chicha.
Forty of the bundles are so-called falsas cabezas or "false heads," having a cotton-filled protuberance on top to mimic a head.
Some are adorned with a metal mask or a wig made of vegetable fibers and dyed black.
The falsas cabezas contain several individuals: one of them the principal person and the others presumably accompanying him in the afterlife.
The bodies of the adults are in the fetal position, the classic Inca burial posture, with their possessions arranged around them.
There is no evidence indicating whether the accompanying individuals are servants or relatives, Cock said, and no suggestion that they were killed when the principal died.
Apparently, bodies were kept until the entire group was dead, at which time they were buried.
The mummy bundles, said archeologist Johan Reinhard of the Mountain Institute, a National Geographic explorer-in-residence, "are like time capsules from the Inca."
Inquiry: U.S. officials seek German fugitives called close associates of the suspected terrorists.
Two of the men tried to gain entry to the U.S. months before the attacks.
U.S. authorities said for the first time Tuesday that they have identified three Al Qaeda operatives from Germany who they believe played key roles in the Sept. 11 hijackings, and FBI agents are working aggressively to apprehend the fugitives as their probe shifts overseas.
U.S. investigators, working with their German counterparts, believe the three suspected terrorists were "closely associated" with three of the suspected hijackers, including suspected ringleader Mohamed Atta, Atty.
Gen. John Ashcroft said.
Two of the fugitives tried to gain entry to the United States months before the attacks, apparently to join the hijackers, but were denied entry, law enforcement sources said.
One of those whose visa requests were rejected at least three times by U.S. Embassy officials in Germany also has been linked to the terrorist attack in Yemen on the U.S. Navy destroyer Cole.
Germany has already put out arrest warrants for the three men in recent weeks.
But Tuesday was the first time U.S. law enforcement officials have publicly identified them or anyone apart from the 19 suspected hijackers who died, as direct participants in the Sept. 11 attacks.
Ashcroft's remarks, made in a joint appearance with German Interior Minister Otto Schily, underscored the recent shift in the terrorist investigation's focus from the United States to Europe, where many of the hijackers first organized and trained in the 1990s.
"It is clear that Hamburg, Germany , served as a central base of operations for these six individuals and their part in the planning of the Sept. 11 attacks," Ashcroft said.
Sought in the international manhunt are Said Bahaji, 26, believed to be a Moroccan national; Ramsi Binalshibh, 29, of Yemen; and Moroccan national Zakariya Essabar, 24.
Schily, who was in Washington to meet with U.S. officials about the status of the worldwide terrorist investigation, and Ashcroft stressed the unusual scale of their bilateral probe, which includes the temporary assignment of 12 FBI agents in Germany.
But there were signs of tensions as well.
Schily said he told Ashcroft that the United States "shouldn't play the scapegoat game" by portraying Germany as Al Qaeda's hub when in fact other European nations, as well as the United States, also failed to spot the terrorists within their own borders.
Schily and Ashcroft skirted what could prove an even more sensitive diplomatic hurdle if the fugitives are eventually apprehended: the question of whether they would be extradited to the United States to stand trial.
"Obviously we'd want them in the United States," said a senior Justice Department official who asked not to be identified.
The problem, however, is that Germany does not allow capital punishment and has a policy of extraditing suspects only if it is assured that "the death penalty is not applied," said Hans Dieter Lucas, spokesman for the German Embassy in Washington.
In an extradition case earlier this year in France, Ashcroft bowed to French demands and agreed not to seek the death penalty against a man accused of killing a doctor who performed abortions in a highly publicized murder in upstate New York in 1998.
But with the public outrage surrounding the Sept. 11 attacks, the political pressure may be even greater to seek the death penalty against anyone directly involved in plotting the attacks, analysts say.
Ashcroft said Tuesday that the extradition question will have to wait.
His first priority, he said, is to apprehend Bahaji, Binalshibh and Essabar before they can carry out another attack.
"As we've observed the Al Qaeda network, we've found that individuals involved in one set of terrorist acts frequently move on to develop and to work on the perpetration of others," Ashcroft said.
"We are very focused . . .
on apprehending them.
"
U.S. and German intelligence officials suspect that the three men fled Germany days before the Sept. 11 attacks, and Ashcroft said their current whereabouts are unknown.
Giving new details about the movements and connections of the Al Qaeda operatives, Ashcroft told reporters that Bahaji, Binalshibh and Essabar all lived with Atta for a time in Hamburg before Atta left for the United States last year.
Bahaji, a German citizen, went to the same technical university that Atta attended from 1992 to 1999.
The two petitioned the university for a Muslim prayer room, as Atta pursued a more orthodox devotion to Islam.
Bahaji left Germany on Sept. 3, Ashcroft said.
Binalshibh, a Yemeni citizen, tried to enroll in a Venice, Fla., flight school with the help of suspected hijacker Ziad Samir Jarrah, who studied flight training and aeronautics in Germany from 1996 to 2000 and then moved to Florida.
But Binalshibh had multiple U.S. visa applications rejected and was never able to enter the United States, according to a law enforcement official.
His most recent visa application was made in May, according to federal investigative reports obtained by The Times.
And FBI agents told officials of the Florida flight school that Binalshibh was rejected because of unspecified involvement "with the bombing of the USS Cole," according to Arne Kruithof, president of the school.
Binalshibh, a former bank employee in Yemen, also attempted a fourth time to obtain a U.S. visa in Sana, Yemen, nearly a year earlier, the reports show.
He left Germany on Sept. 5.
Essabar, a Moroccan citizen who appears in Bahaji's wedding video in Germany with Jarrah and suspected hijacker Marwan Al-Shehhi, also made arrangements to travel to Florida last February.
He applied for a U.S. visa twice but was turned down and apparently never entered the United States, the law enforcement official said.
Although Ashcroft would not detail the role that the three fugitives are believed to have played in the Sept. 11 attacks, he said that "their connections to the hijackers are extensive."
Germany has alleged in its arrest warrants that the three men have been part of a terrorist organization since at least 1999 and that they are being sought for "planning and carrying out the attacks" of Sept. 11, Ashcroft noted.
U.S. authorities have not brought criminal charges against anyone for allegedly taking part in the terrorist attacks.
U.S. officials investigating the attacks have arrested more than 900 people who they suspect may have information about the hijackings, but almost all have been held for immigration violations or other charges not related to the attacks.
About a dozen have also been detained as "material witnesses."
U.S. officials acknowledge that their priority is stopping future attacks rather than building cases for criminal prosecution.
Asked why the United States had not brought terrorism charges against anyone, Justice Department spokeswoman Mindy Tucker said Tuesday: "When we feel it's appropriate to bring charges against people, we will."
Germany's more than 500-strong special investigative commission, including 100 police and security agents in Hamburg, is being augmented by 12 to 15 FBI agents who are mostly coordinating information between the two countries, Hamburg police and intelligence officials have said.
Under German law, foreign law enforcement officers have a very limited range of operation.
FBI agents are allowed to observe German police in the gathering of evidence but not to pose questions directly.
With the language barrier and limited numbers, the agents currently in Germany seldom take part in interrogations, instead sifting through the reports and relaying important details back to the United States.
German Federal Prosecutor Kay Nehm also has a representative at the Department of Justice in Washington, a senior government official involved in the terrorism probe said.
Also, the Federal Criminal Office, which oversees the 16 state-level services that approximate the FBI in its duties, has agents in Florida and Washington.
Because the German domestic intelligence and police forces are organized on the state, rather than federal, level, investigators concede that coordination among the German agencies involved is stalled by bureaucracy and an elaborate system of power division.
The internal controls intended to prevent law enforcement's abuse of civil rights, as occurred during the Third Reich, was actually designed by U.S. and other Allied officials during their occupation and administration of Germany in the years after World War II.
In France, meanwhile, cooperation between the FBI and local law enforcement officials in the terrorism probe appears to be strong.
Last week, the FBI's legal attache in Paris even broke the agency's media blackout to offer a brief comment to a newspaper, praising a French judge who has led a probe that netted more than a dozen suspects accused of plotting to bomb the U.S. Embassy in Paris.
Two FBI agents are also stationed at the U.S. Embassy in Brussels, the capital of Belgium, where the relationship with local authorities has been problematic.
U.S. agents have taken a keen interest in Belgium's arrests related to the alleged plot against the U.S. Embassy in Paris.
Last month, Belgium police arrested a Tunisian accused of intending to be the suicide bomber in that case, and later found a cache of suspected bomb-making chemicals.
But to the dismay of U.S. officials, judicial authorities in Belgium have been reticent about sharing even basic information.
That has stymied the FBI's hopes of quickly culling the suspect's contacts for ties to European terrorist networks and possibly to the Sept. 11 hijackers, according to knowledgeable officials and news reports.   
Lichtblau reported from Washington and Williams from Berlin.
Times staff writer Sebastian Rotella in Paris and Patrick J. McDonnell in Los Angeles contributed to this report.
There has been much punditry about Gov. Gray Davis' paddling this week.
Navigating through 958 bill signings and 170 vetoes before Monday's deadline, on which side was Davis paddling his canoe?
You remember that old canoe.
Used to belong to Davis' former boss, Gov. Jerry Brown.
Advised Brown: "Paddle a little on the left, paddle a little on the right and keep on going right down the middle."
Or, as Davis put it more conventionally upon taking office in January 1999: "I will govern neither from the right nor from the left, but from the center, propelled not by ideology, but by common-sense."
Common-sense politics.
So in inking bills, was Davis paddling on the left to secure his Democratic base in anticipation of a reelection race against Richard Riordan, a Republican centrist?
That's the conventional wisdom.
Or was he paddling on the right to please big-bucks contributors in business.
That's the view of liberal Senate leader John Burton (D-San Francisco), who says Davis' veto for the third straight year of legislation to increase workers' compensation benefits was "outrageously shameful."
My take:
Davis merely was paddling--on the left and the right--back in the direction of the votes that elected him governor in 1998.
Indeed, he was paddling in the same waters that have sustained every successful top-of-the-ticket California politician for more than a decade.
Davis reasserted his abortion rights stance by signing, with great fanfare, a bill making it a state crime to threaten abortion clinics.
He freshened up his environmentalist stripes by placing a $2.6-billion parks bond proposal on the March ballot and signing a bill to close a loophole that real estate speculators have used to inflate the price of coastal land.
It's not surprising that after a self-imposed moratorium on new gun controls, Davis signed legislation requiring a safety exam and license to buy a handgun.
The governor hinted to me last year that he'd eventually sign such a bill, noting: "You have to take a driver's test to drive a car. . . .
That's a concept people are comfortable with."
And that's a key to predicting this governor:
Are people comfortable with it?
Davis is not one to force-feed the public an unpopular policy--or, as chief strategist Garry South says: "He's not going to put a bigger pig in the python than it can digest."
Before signing the gun licensing bill, for example, Davis insisted on amendments that would make the measure acceptable to most law enforcement groups.
Like Wilson, Davis campaigned as a crime fighter.
He's currently racking up a long list of law enforcement endorsements, the kind Republicans used to get when Wilson and Gov. George Deukmejian were running.
Democratic consultant Kam Kuwata once told me something about Wilson that also applies to Davis: "He'll never be a hero to any one ideological group, but he understands how to put together the winning combination."
Davis, mindful of an important party constituency, long has supported gay rights.
But he opposed same-sex marriages because, he said, the public wasn't ready.
It was not a shock when the governor signed a bill substantially expanding the rights of domestic partners.
Davis had approved a narrower bill in 1999 and asked the author, Assemblywoman Carole Migden (D-San Francisco), not to press for an expansion until this year.
"He felt the same way he did about gun bills," Migden says.
"He wanted a break.
But he consistently said he'd sign a bill, and he did.
He signed the strongest bill in the nation."
On labor and business, Davis often is conflicted.
Unions were his crucial backers in 1998.
But if he remains acceptable to business leaders, it will be almost impossible for a Republican to beat him.
The biggest priority on business' agenda was a veto of the workers' compensation bill, and Davis delivered.
He'll try to work out a compromise next year.
Meanwhile, the governor did sign legislation that labor fought for, including bills to increase unemployment benefits and expand the prevailing wage law.
Business and labor, therefore, both tolerate Davis.
"There's no question he takes our views into consideration," says Allan Zaremberg, president of the state Chamber of Commerce.
Asserts Thomas Rankin, president of the California Labor Federation: "
Clearly he's better than any Republican."
Davis still isn't through the energy mess.
And he'll face a huge budget deficit next year.
But right now he's cruising in his canoe in well-chartered waters.
Phone lines and some offices stay open.
Trade requests are postponed until markets reopen.
U.S. mutual fund companies, which hold a combined $7 trillion in assets, were jolted by Tuesday's terrorist attacks, and some firms took extra security measures but said investors need not worry about account access or records.
Discount brokerage giant Charles Schwab Corp. evacuated its World Trade Center branch, and the firm's New York employees were believed to be safe, said spokesman Glen Mathison, speaking from the firm's thinly staffed San Francisco headquarters.
Customer phone lines remained open, and Schwab's offices across the nation were "staying open as much as they can," he said.
Like other firms, Schwab, which operates a major mutual fund supermarket as well as the leading online stock brokerage, was watching developments to determine today's staffing needs and any other steps it may take this week.
Boston-based Fidelity Investments , the nation's largest fund company with about $565 billion in its stock and bond funds, shut investor centers Tuesday in Los Angeles, New York, San Francisco and other cities.
But phone lines and some of its about 80 centers stayed open.
For three major fund firms based at the World Trade Center, ramifications of the attack--including any human toll--could not be determined.
A report at financial Web site Morningstar.com noted that the buildings were home to Oppenheimer Funds and Citigroup 's Smith Barney and Salomon Bros. Funds, and Deutsche Bank Asset Management had offices there.
Los Angeles-based Capital Group Cos. shut its five major U.S. offices, including an operation in Rockefeller Center three miles north of the World Trade Center, according to Investor News Service.
The move was made for the "physical safety and mental well-being" of the company's employees, a spokesman said.
Individual investors' reaction to the attacks appeared to be restrained, several fund firms said.
Customer phone call volumes at Fidelity, Vanguard Group and other firms were surprisingly light, according to spokespersons.
"I suspect that a lot of people are simply watching TV," Fidelity spokeswoman Anne Crowley said.
"Typically in market crises we'd expect to have management folks and people like me, who don't normally handle calls, answering the phones to help out," said Rebecca Cohen, spokeswoman for Valley Forge, Pa.-based Vanguard, the second-biggest fund company with nearly $500 billion in stock and bond fund assets.
"
Instead, we sent people home at 3 p.m. EDT rather than 5:30.
We didn't need a call to arms."
At Strong Investments in Milwaukee, spokeswoman Jody Lowe said the firm took additional, unspecified security measures with its computer systems as a precaution, though no problems were reported.
Phone representatives and messages posted at several fund company Web sites explained to investors that any trades investors requested could not be processed until U.S. markets reopen.
At Janus Capital Corp. in Denver, its Web site said: "In light of recent events and the markets' closure, any purchases, redemptions or exchanges placed Tuesday will be priced at the net asset value determined after the next New York Stock Exchange market close.
It is unknown when the NYSE will next open for business."
At Fidelity, investors were told that "market" orders (orders to buy and sell stock at any available price) would not be taken. "
Limit" orders (orders issued to buy or sell only at a specific price or better) were taken but won't be carried out until the market reopens, Crowley said.
Orders to buy or redeem mutual funds were taken and will be executed at "the next available price when the market reopens," she said.
Strong did not take stock or fund trade requests online, Lowe said.
Possible damage to the financial system's infrastructure is yet to be determined, noted Jon Burnham, chairman of Burnham Securities Inc. in midtown Manhattan and manager of the Burnham Fund.
"The concern is what damage, if any, has been done to the trading systems--all the phone lines and computers that process the transactions," he said.
"We just don't know."
Queen Elizabeth the queen mother, whose relentless charm and iron will steered the British monarchy through a world war and an abdication crisis and into a modern age where its robes were sullied by embarrassing marital antics, died Saturday.
She was 101, the oldest member of Britain's millennium-old monarchy, which has a history of short-lived men and long-lived women.
Each successive birthday further exalted the "queen mum" as an ageless British fixture--the Rock of Gibraltar upholstered in pastel silk and crowned with a feathery hat.
As her husband, King George VI, did 50 years before, she died in her sleep.
Her daughter, the queen, was with her "beloved mother" when she died at Royal Lodge, Windsor, at 3:15 on an English spring afternoon.
Since Christmas, her health was complicated by a cough and chest infection, and her younger daughter, Margaret, had died seven weeks ago.
A palace spokesman said her condition deteriorated suddenly Saturday.
"It was a very moving and very sad moment, but luckily it was very peaceful," Margaret Rhodes, the queen mother's niece, told BBC television.
Prince Charles, said to be her favorite grandchild, was said to be "devastated" at the news.
He and his sons, Princes William and Harry, were returning to London today from a ski holiday in Switzerland.
As with all senior royals, plans for the queen mother's funeral--code-named "Tay Bridge" after a bridge in her Scottish homeland--have been in place for a long time, but her robust health kept defying the preparations.
Her body is to be taken to the Royal Chapel of All Saints in Windsor Great Park early today, where it is to lie in state for three days.
The funeral will be held at Westminster Abbey, and she will be buried at Windsor.
No precise schedule has been announced.
The queen mother's life spanned the 19th, 20th and 21st centuries.
Born in the reign of Queen Victoria, she married one of Victoria's great-grandsons, before a soap opera drama made her queen of England and the last empress of India.
She outlived her husband by half a century and lived to witness her elder daughter celebrate 50 years on the throne of an England much diminished in the queen mother's lifetime.
News of the "queen mum's" death spread on a quiet Easter weekend.
Scores of mourners, some bringing flowers, gathered outside Windsor Castle, about 20 miles west of London.
The bells of a church nearby tolled to mark her death.
Small crowds gathered outside Buckingham Palace, where a death notice was posted on the black iron gates.
The Union Jack flew at half-staff.
As was done for Princess Margaret's death in February and Princess Diana's death in 1997, condolence books are to be opened for signing at St. James's Palace today.
Prime Minister Tony Blair called her "a symbol of Britain's decency and courage," a woman possessed of "a profound sense of duty and service.
She had this selfless devotion to duty.
That's what she believed in.
That's how she lived her life.
And that's how I hope she will be remembered."
The archbishop of Canterbury, George Carey, said of her, "I loved her sense of fun and her interest in people.
She had the common touch."
The death of this living relic of an empire brought forth a wistful sorrow that lacked the shock of Diana's death but instead arose from a country that seemed to be mourning not just the "queen mum" but the glory days of Britain itself.
The queen mother's own Elizabethan Age spanned the 15 years that she was queen consort to King George VI.
It began on the December day in 1936 that her husband's elder brother, King Edward VIII, abdicated the throne to marry an American divorcee named Wallis Simpson.
It ended in February 1952, when her husband died and her elder daughter, Elizabeth, became queen.
Over the years, the queen mother was handled with kid gloves even by the fickle British tabloid press, which can be fawning and carnivorous by turns, but her greatest compliment came from Adolf Hitler.
The German Fuehrer, watching newsreels of her morale-building visits with bombed-out Britons during World War II, called her "the most dangerous woman in Europe."
She was diagnosed last year with anemia and had taken a number of falls over the years, in part from failing eyesight and perhaps in part because she insisted on wearing high heels to boost her 5-feet-nothing height.
She had two hip replacements and cataract surgery, and underwent a colostomy in 1966--something the palace characterized delicately only as "major abdominal surgery."
When she choked on a fish bone in her 80s, the dedicated fisherwoman was quoted as calling the episode "the salmon's revenge."
If royal tombs had epitaphs, "charming" would be chiseled deep on Elizabeth's.
In her youth, platoons of men had fallen for her decorously flirtatious sex appeal.
She was as delectably plump and fluffily attired as a bonbon in a frilled paper cup.
She was the life of the party, accomplished at singing, dancing and charades, and through her long public life as a royal, whether planting trees or cutting ribbons, she appeared to be enjoying herself enormously.
All the more remarkable in the royal family, she had some modest intellectual interests, going to the theater, befriending the poetic Sitwells and hanging on her walls fairly modern paintings that had nothing to do with dead aristocrats.
To her people, she became the embodiment of great British virtues and small British vices.
Had she been the grandmother down the street, as her humbler countrymen liked to think of her, her fondness for liquor and chocolates, for racetrack betting and horse breeding and for racy jokes would have gotten her labeled a bawdy old lady.
People loved the tale of her calling down from an upper floor of her palace, wanting help from a doting household whose numbers included many homosexuals: "Are there any old queens down there who'll fetch a gin and tonic for an old queen up here?"
A servant reported finding half-bitten chocolates in wastebaskets, where Elizabeth tossed them if the filling was not to her liking.
On a tour of Manchester, a constable staring at her chewing something was startled when she opened her window and tossed him a caramel.
Long before Princess Diana, Elizabeth was the royal star, pioneer of the "royal common touch" and the now-standard "royal walkabout," her magical chemistry elevating the ordinary to the regal.
It was, a biographer wrote, "a splendid collusion, hoaxed and hoaxters indistinguishable from each other."
Her critics, few but fierce, mocked her extravagances.
Royal biographer Anthony Holden faulted her as "a woman who has never done a day's work in her life, who has blithely run up eight-figure overdrafts of the taxpayers' money on racehorses, had four palatial residences, 50 full-time servants and the pampered life of a latter-day Marie Antoinette."
Writer Will Self ridiculed the doting masses who loved her as one of them: "No, she hasn't been 'with us'; she's been in the royal enclosure at Ascot."
Naturally, legions of loyalists volunteered to horsewhip these cads.
Taxpaying Britons who deplored the cut-ups of junior Windsors found their matriarch's failings trivial and even adorable.
When word leaked that this rich old lady had overdrawn her account by millions, people on pensions sent her checks.
Her birthdays were elaborately celebrated; on her 80th, a squadron of jets flew overhead forming the letter "E," and on her 100th, model Jerry Hall, garbed as a goddess, joined thousands of performers for a gala broadcast carried live and commercial-free.
If Southern women are steel magnolias, Scottish-born Elizabeth was steel heather.
She was deeply traditional, and wished the royal genie could be put back in the bottle of privacy.
Royal embarrassments were nothing new--one of her princely brothers-in-law was a drug addict and bisexual, and two of her nieces long listed as dead turned up alive in the 1980s, stashed in a mental asylum.
But letting private matters become public, as Princess Diana regularly did, was regarded as at least an equal offense.
Elizabeth was born Aug. 4, 1900, and this youngest daughter of an earl spent part of her charmed childhood in the Macbeth-haunted castle of Glamis.
During the world war that ravaged her generation, Glamis set up a military hospital for convalescing officers, who fell for the small, sweet-natured earl's daughter who wrote their letters and kept them amused.
Possessed of that brilliant something--instinct or talent or both--that a PR firm would pay millions to own
, Elizabeth knew unerringly how to fill the royal slippers.
On her wedding day, she went to the altar without a bouquet; on her way up the aisle in Westminster Abbey, she laid her roses and white heather on the Tomb of the Unknown Warrior.
She was quick with a diplomatic quip to defuse difficult moments.
On a South Africa visit, a Boer told her, "I'm sorry, but I really hate the English."
The queen of England zinged back, "I do sympathize.
You see, I'm Scots."
Her prince was hot-tempered, nervous and knock-kneed, and she took him in hand.
His stuttering, probably from being switched from left-handed to right, made courtiers regard him as poorly suited to public life.
Elizabeth's decision to take him to a speech therapist was as radical in the 1920s as Diana's to seek out astrologers was 60 years later, to less happy results.
And what could not be changed could be ignored or avoided; the unofficial royal slogan was "Never complain, never explain."
Good timing found her stuck in bed with the flu during the chaos of Abdication Week, in December 1936, when her brother-in-law, King Edward VIII, gave up crown and empire for "the woman I love.
" Elizabeth's husband was king, and she was queen.
Elizabeth sailed grandly into the role, managing to be simultaneously regal and cozy.
Lifelong acclaim did not blunt her implacable dislike for Wallis Simpson and those who took her side.
Elizabeth regarded Simpson as a greedy adventuress whose ambitions had besmirched royal repute and forced the weight of kingship on Elizabeth's own husband, killing him in his 50s.
Against all custom and law, it was Elizabeth who is said to have insisted that Simpson not share her new husband's royal status.
In later years Elizabeth sent flowers to the ailing Simpson, but in 1986 she might have gleaned some satisfaction from seeing Simpson buried without the word "royal" on her gravestone.
And yet Elizabeth's daughter Margaret, who was pressured not to marry her first love, a divorced man, ended up divorcing the man she did marry.
So would three of Elizabeth's six grandchildren.
She refused to meet Prince Charles' lover, Camilla Parker Bowles, and was said to have been promised that Charles would not marry her while the queen mother lived.
Britain's royal family survived where other royal families failed by pulling off the knife-edge act of seeming like a nice middle-class family that just happens to wear diamonds and dine from gold plate.
World War II was the proving of it.
The king and queen, who had at first favored appeasing Hitler, led the British empire to war.
Steel-shuttered Buckingham Palace famously went on the same fuel and food cutbacks as Yorkshire cottages (although royal forests and farms and cellars supplemented the meagerness).
Elizabeth endeared herself with such gestures as stopping on her way to a bomb shelter to pet a cat, and turning around the camera for a child who was holding it the wrong way.
Her reward was love bordering on idolatry, beginning with her husband, who regarded her as "the most marvelous person."
At a maternity ward visit, the queen asked anxiously about one patient in obvious distress, and was told, "She's in advanced labor, but she will not go into the labor ward until she has seen the queen.
" Only rarely was there a break in the smile, such as the brief newsreel footage of an "expression of distaste" as she moved through what a biographer described as "a group of dejected and no doubt smelly citizens" after an air raid.
In marriage, Elizabeth wanted to replicate her own happy family life, and her husband wanted to enjoy one that he had never had.
Bookish they were not.
Both indulged their daughters, especially their academic chores, and one nobleman observed, "I do not think she has altogether brought up her daughters in a way that has fitted them for the job they have to do."
King George VI died of lung cancer in February 1952.
Widowhood demoted her from the throne, but she was not upstaged, not even by her shy daughter, who was now the queen.
The royal equivalent of work--ribbon-cuttings, dedications, unveilings--brought her back to public life from deep mourning, and Elizabeth soon turned her sunrise smile on every besuited official, every little girl with a clutch of posies.
In the 1950s and '60s, as the sun set with regularity on a shrinking British realm, she became her daughter's most personable ambassador, journeying to political hot spots such as Rhodesia, the Middle East, Northern Ireland, and less perilous destinations such as the United States and the Caribbean.
Like a brilliant one-woman theatrical show, her meticulously choreographed appearances left behind eternally uncritical admirers.
At her own private dinners, the widowed queen could cut loose, instituting "anti-toasts" to those she disliked: a left-wing politician, Ugandan strongman Idi Amin, and former President Carter, reportedly "because he is the only man, since my dear husband died, to have had the effrontery to kiss me on the lips."
As her age crept toward 100, her relatives, friends and courtiers began dying around her.
When a lady-in-waiting pleaded that she felt too old for the job, Elizabeth demanded of her, "What about me?"
Times London Bureau Chief Marjorie Miller contributed to this report.
Prosecutors said Tuesday they will seek a prison sentence if O.J. Simpson is convicted in his road rage trial, reversing themselves just before the start of jury selection.
Miami's top prosecutor had previously said the former football great and actor is unlikely to face jail time over the alleged road rage incident.
When charges were filed in December, State Attorney Katherine Fernandez Rundle had said anger-control counseling was the expected punishment upon a conviction.
The felony auto burglary and misdemeanor battery charges carry a maximum 16-year prison term.
"We do in fact intend to seek a sentence within that sentencing range," Assistant State Attorney Paul Mendelson said Tuesday.
Defense attorney Yale Galanter responded that Simpson "is well aware of" the range of possible outcomes.
The trial stems from an angry encounter with another motorist in his suburban Miami neighborhood.
Simpson was accused of scratching motorist Jeffrey Pattinson's face while pulling off Pattinson's glasses.
"Another day in paradise," Simpson said as he entered court for jury selection.
Simpson's courtroom past quickly became the focus of jury selection.
Simpson was cleared by a jury in the 1994 slayings of his ex-wife and her friend.
A civil jury later found him liable and he was ordered to pay $33.5 million.
The first jury candidate said she did not think she "would be a fair juror" because charges in both states involved violent behavior.
Jury selection was expected to take two to four weeks for less than two days of testimony.
Simpson's attorney said that before the Dec. 4 encounter, Pattinson tailgated Simpson for a distance equivalent to "over half of a football field.
"
"That's a long way to be honking your horn and flashing your lights," Galanter said.
"That just doesn't impress me as the act of a man who's cool, calm and collected."
Pattinson says he honked and flashed his lights when Simpson's sport utility vehicle rolled through a stop sign.
Simpson stopped and approached Pattinson's SUV, and allegedly reached in and pulled off his glasses.
"This is an incident that took place in at most 30 seconds, and there were two people there," Galanter said.
He believes Simpson "is being unfairly targeted as a result of his celebrity status and notoriety." 
Copyright 2001 Associated Press
Transportation: Bush responds to pressure to allow business to resume at Reagan National--with stringent ground rules.
President Bush would like to see Reagan National Airport reopened--but under much more stringent security, a top administration official said Sunday. 
The remarks by Andrew H. Card Jr., White House chief of staff, were a clear indication that the administration is responding to political and business pressure to reopen the airport, the only one still closed following the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. 
As recently as Friday, the White House had distanced itself from remarks by Transportation Secretary Norman Y. Mineta, who said the airport would "definitely" reopen. 
"The president would like us to get National Airport . . .
opened as quickly as we can," Card said.
"But we have to be sensitive to the security concerns." 
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld also agreed Sunday that it was time to resume flights from Reagan National. 
"I personally am hopeful that Washington National will be open," Rumsfeld said.
"I think that it would be a shame if we had to alter our behavior.
When we do that to any great extent, the terrorists win." 
Card spoke on "Fox News Sunday," while Rumsfeld was interviewed on NBC's "Meet the Press." 
Government officials said heightened security procedures might include placing air marshals on a greater proportion of flights serving National, much closer scrutiny of passengers, baggage and airport workers and new restrictions on aircraft approach and departure patterns. 
Located across the Potomac River in Arlington, Va., Reagan National is only a 15-minute cab ride from downtown Washington, making it an ideal location for business and government travelers.
But the Secret Service long has regarded it as a security risk.
Planes landing and taking off come within close proximity to the Pentagon, the White House, the Capitol, CIA headquarters and other government buildings. 
"It is a relatively minor, minor course correction to end up crashing into one of those buildings," Rumsfeld said. 
But Card said he was "optimistic that we can find the right balance between security and economic opportunity." 
The country's 37th-busiest airport, Reagan National usually handles about 9,000 takeoffs and landings a day, slightly more than the volume at San Jose International.
Its continued closure has idled thousands of workers in the airline and related industries and sent shock waves through the metropolitan Washington economy.
The survival of US Airways, which is headquartered nearby, has been in increased jeopardy since Reagan National was closed. 
Political and business leaders from Virginia and Washington have lobbied the White House intensely to reopen the airport.
Members of Congress, many of whom fly to their home districts for the weekend, also are applying pressure.
The airport is minutes from their offices--unlike Washington's other airport, Dulles International, which is about 30 miles from downtown.
And they get free parking. 
Bush is expected to decide the airport's future after reviewing the options early this week, Card said.
He left open the possibility that it might reopen gradually and operate under much stricter security affecting passengers, pilots, air traffic controllers and airport workers. 
Officials from the Federal Aviation Administration and the local authority that operates Reagan National are designing a new security plan that they hope will convince Bush to reopen the facility. 
Among the measures under consideration, government and aviation sources say, is a ban on corporate jets and private planes.
Officials say other measures could include aggressive and highly visible patrols of terminals, parking lots and access gates and painstaking screening of passengers, including the use of computerized profiling to identify potential risks. 
The most drastic option available--shooting down a hijacked civilian plane--is not of much use against aircraft landing or taking off at Reagan National.
There is little time for fighter aircraft to intercept a pilot bent on a suicide attack against one of Washington's buildings. 
"The problem is almost impossible to deal with from the air," Rumsfeld said.
"What one would have to do is to deal with it from the ground. . . .
And I think the way to deal with that is by proper training of people on the ground, the protection of aircraft and air marshals." 
Ground-based missiles may offer better protection as a last resort than fighters, aviation sources say.
But there might not be enough time to fire them, and it would be very difficult to prevent damage on the ground. 
American Airlines Flight 77, the plane that crashed into the Pentagon on Sept. 11, took off not from Reagan National but from Dulles.
It flew as far as the Ohio-Kentucky border before turning back.
A source who was briefed on the hijacked plane's radar track said it came high from the west and circled deliberately over the Virginia side of the Potomac River, losing altitude in preparation to strike the Pentagon.
Some authorities now question initial reports that Flight 77 was aimed at the White House and diverted to the Pentagon at the last minute.
Sununu to Run Against Smith in N.H. 
Republican Rep. John Sununu said Monday he will run for the Senate next year in a challenge to GOP Sen. Bob Smith, a maverick who has drawn the wrath of some within the party.
Though never mentioning Smith by name at a news conference, Sununu needled him with promises to be "a temperate and deliberate voice" in the Senate and "a senator who makes New Hampshire proud."
"We need leadership from those who speak with a clear and consistent voice," he said.
Smith, one of the Senate's most conservative members, often has stood almost alone on issues.
He provoked the wrath of many Republicans when he briefly quit the party in 1999 to run for president as an independent.
He delivered a stinging attack on the GOP from the Senate floor.
Sununu, 37, a three-term congressman and son of former Gov. John H. Sununu, was urged by many Republicans to challenge Smith.
His announcement ended months of anticipation about what is expected to be an expensive and divisive primary.
Others at the news conference said Smith's 1999 defection was a major reason they support Sununu.
"We all remember how he walked away from the party," said Edward Dupont, a former state Senate president and former Smith supporter.
Former House Speaker Donna Sytek, another former Smith supporter, said she was offended by Smith's remarks when he left the party, and said he returned only to get a key committee chairmanship.
Sununu stayed away from the issue, but said whoever wins the September primary, "the nominee will have my full and unequivocal support."
The race has national implications for control of the Senate, where Democrats hold a 50-49 advantage.
Smith, 60, who earlier said the challenge could lead to the most divisive primary in state history, had little to add Monday.
"I would have preferred to concentrate our campaign resources on the general election," he said.
"I plan to run an aggressive, grassroots campaign."
Former Republican U.S. Sen. Gordon Humphrey, a Smith supporter who is running for governor, said Sununu's candidacy is "a disaster for the (state) Republican Party, and has the potential to destroy it for a generation."
State GOP Chairman John Dowd disagreed.
"The character of these two people is such that they don't do negative campaigning," Dowd said.
Democrats see a bitter GOP primary as a plus for Democratic Gov. Jeanne Shaheen, who is expected to run for the seat.
Sununu and Smith are social and fiscal conservatives.
They oppose abortion, support more defense spending, and stood with President Bush on tax cuts.
One of their few disagreements is over proposed oil drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in Alaska.
Sununu favors it; Smith opposes it. 
Copyright 2001 Associated Press
Among the surprises to emerge from last week's terrorist attack is the fact that Logan International Airport's chief of security had no background in aviation before assuming his job.
Former state trooper Joseph Lawless, 43, was then-Gov.
William F. Weld's personal driver eight years ago when Weld tapped him for the $125,000-a-year job.
"On paper, you can laugh about Lawless being a driver, but he was a state police guy, and he had done investigative work.
It wasn't a ridiculous idea on the face of it," said former Weld advisor Martin Linsky, now a lecturer at Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government.
"But it is hard to defend in retrospect."
Massachusetts Port Authority officials would not permit Lawless to be interviewed for this story.
But with international attention focused on Boston's busy airport, Lawless suddenly became a media presence.
Hours after two planes that left Logan on Sept. 11 crashed into New York's World Trade Center, a stone-faced Lawless told Massachusetts residents about increased subway service to help passengers stranded at Logan.
Lawless assured the commonwealth that airport administrators were working closely with the Federal Aviation Administration, the FBI and state police.
He announced a "dramatic" increase in police presence at Logan, and declared that possible security breeches were under investigation "starting right now."
But just as quickly, Lawless was grilled about slip-ups at Logan: Just how did the terrorists pass through security? "
Logan is as secure as any other airport in this country," he steadfastly maintained.
Lawless did admit, however, that FAA guidelines allow 5% of employee identification badges to "go missing" at any time.
About 12,000 Massport employees carry such badges at Logan.
At least one real or fraudulent Logan identification badge was reported to have been found in a car the hijackers abandoned at the airport here.
Lawless also sparked an embarrassing dispute by telling federal agents their help was not needed in putting in place new FAA security measures.
Sidestepping Lawless, senior federal officials informed airport administrators that they intended to lend a hand.
Bestowing political patronage on key jobs at seaports and airports is "extraordinary," University of Texas public affairs professor Leigh Boske said.
"I've never heard of such a thing," the transportation policy specialist said.
In staffing sensitive administrative and technical positions "normally you have national and international searches," Boske said.
Installing the governor's driver as security chief "sounds bizarre."
Lawless' boss, Massport President and CEO Virginia Buckingham, also has no aviation experience.
Buckingham is a former Weld press aide who in 1998 managed the successful gubernatorial campaign of Weld's Republican successor, Paul Cellucci.
Her predecessor, former Republican congressman Peter I. Blute--a Weld appointee--also had no experience running an airport.
Weld and Cellucci were not available for comment.
In new law's wake, U.S. residents seek office in Mexican hometowns.
They tout know-how and desire to improve lives, but critics fear the spread of El Norte's influence.
Thirty years after Andres Bermudez illegally entered the United States stuffed in a car trunk, he came home this month with a marching band and dinner for everyone in his old neighborhood.
Decked out in fancy Western wear, sunglasses and gold jewelry, Bermudez--now known as the "Tomato King" for the plentiful harvests on his 600-acre spread in central California's Yolo County-- appealed for votes to become the town's mayor in Sunday's elections.
As he walked from business to business on the dusty streets, shaking hands and kissing babies, his staffers broke out in song: "He's here.
He's here, the guy who will take out the ruling party!"
Bermudez's brashness has made him the talk of Jerez, a city of 40,000 in the central state of Zacatecas.
He and two other U.S. residents are the first to campaign for Mexican elective office since the country's "dual nationality" provision went into effect in 1998, allowing Mexicans who had become citizens of other countries to regain their nationality and property rights in their homeland.
On the campaign trail, the burly 51-year-old Bermudez steps from his late-model Chevrolet pickup in his snakeskin cowboy boots to talk with farmers in huaraches.
Alongside the dirt road, he promises to erase corruption and bring the U.S. work ethic and technology to the Mexican countryside.
Bermudez and the other two U.S. residents are running mayoral campaigns against candidates from the Institutional Revolutionary Party (known by its Spanish acronym of PRI), which has held near-absolute power here for seven decades.
Juan Duran, 50, who owns a car repair shop in Oxnard, is running for mayor of Tepetongo, a town of 10,000 about 25 miles away.
Martin Carvajal, 45, a factory manager who moved from Los Angeles to Fort Worth two years ago, is running for mayor of Apulco, population 5,000.
The men are driven by a mix of altruism and ego.
Like many migrants, they want to return to Mexico to show that they achieved wealth and success in the U.S.
But they also want to further development in towns that lack sewers and paved roads.
If they win, they will have to give up many comforts they have come to expect as U.S. residents.
The candidates' wives wonder how they will fare leaving their friends and homes to live in small Mexican towns where social circles are often closed to newcomers.
But the candidates and their supporters hope that their examples will encourage other migrants to return as part of a new breed of binational politicians.
Juan Hernandez, advisor to Mexican President Vicente Fox on Mexicans abroad, said the Mexican government supports the three migrants' activism, even though none are from Fox's center right National Action Party (PAN).
He and others believe that these municipal elections could usher in other candidates from the United States for state and federal legislative posts.
"These individuals come from immigrant-sending regions.
They understand the issues in their communities.
It tells us that Mexicans abroad are becoming successful.
They are also becoming more and more politically active," Hernandez said.
Fox, the first non-PRI president in 70 years, made migrants the hallmark of his campaign and courted them in trips to the U.S.
"We have political power now, and this is just the beginning," said Santa Ana resident Lupe Gomez, president of the Zacatecas Civic Front, one of several clubs founded by immigrants to California.
Some of the clubs have raised millions for public works projects in Zacatecas and were the breeding grounds for the Mexican campaigns.
The U.S. is now home to about half of the 1.2 million natives of Zacatecas, a state where "yup" and si are as easily exchanged as pesos and dollars.
Men wear Dodger caps as often as cowboy hats.
In these towns--separated by miles of mountains, farm fields and swaths of arid, desolate terrain--many houses stand abandoned by the families who have moved to "El Norte."
Talk of illegal border crossings raises no more eyebrows than a chat about the weather.
Still, some feel uncomfortable with the candidates and fear encroaching U.S. influence.
In a column about the Bermudez campaign in the local newspaper, El Sol de Zacatecas, J.E. Rivera wrote that many "believe that a great deal of our problems (family disintegration, AIDS, drug addiction, body piercing and tattoos) are related to North American influence."
Indeed, American culture is apparent on the campaign trail.
Campaign staff shrug when Bermudez asks for "el schedule."
He spouts English expletives when a staffer suggests that he paint his $40,000 pickup with campaign slogans.
He speaks longingly of HBO and thousand island dressing.
Duran looks as much a tourist as a candidate as he videotapes trips through the poor neighborhoods, many without running water.
Carvajal, deported 13 times under various aliases before becoming a U.S. resident in the 1980s, says he will need to return to Fort Worth to pay off campaign debt if he loses.
In all three cases, foes have challenged the men's loyalty to Mexico--how long they lived there and whether they intend to stay.
Raul Rodriguez Santoyo, president of the PRI in Zacatecas state, says none of the American candidates meet residency requirements.
Bermudez won the nomination of the leftist Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD) only after a monthlong battle to get the local government to certify that he had lived in Jerez for the required one continuous year--effectively pushing the truth, because he had been on his farm near Winters, Calif., for extended periods during that time.
Bermudez, Duran and Carvajal "may want to help, but there are other ways to do it," said Rodriguez.
"The political race satisfies the ego but not the law."
If there is a godfather of the mayoral candidates, it is Zacatecas Gov. Ricardo Monreal.
Monreal, who campaigned in California and visits the state twice a year, suggested the idea of the mayoral bids to the three men late last year.
He said they showed leadership, had money in the bank and a had a track record with voters because of their activity in civic clubs in California.
"They have learned about business, about technology, about farming, but . . .
they are the same Zacatecans we are, and they can help," said Monreal, a member of the PRD who makes no secret that he aspires to be Mexico's president.
For Carvajal, that learning process began as he moved between Zacatecas and California for nearly a decade.
He and his family finally settled in Los Angeles.
He became a legal U.S. resident and opened a furniture factory.
Until five years ago, when he sold the firm, he employed 70 people.
When one of his sons got too close to gang activity, he moved to Fort Worth, where he now manages a furniture factory.
Wife Olivia works on the assembly line.
Son Jose was the first in the family to graduate from college and is looking for work to use his engineering degree.
Daughter Maria is studying computers at the University of Texas, Arlington.
The youngest, Jesus, is 13.
"I feel like we got the American dream.
Now we want the Mexican one too," he said.
Seeking office in the remote village of Apulco as the candidate of a new centrist party--
Democratic Convergence--he is considered to have a good chance of winning.
Carvajal helped found the Zacatecas club in Los Angeles in 1987 and has remained very active, often traveling to Mexico three or four times a year.
"I just kept thinking, one day I will be mayor. . . .
I want to rob technology from the United States and bring it here," he said.
Although Duran's chances of becoming a mayor seem dim, he keeps knocking on doors.
As a member of the center-left Work Party, he says he wants real change for a place that will always be home.
In the late 1960s, Duran's family left Zacatecas and he moved among Los Angeles, Oregon, Chicago and Mexicali, Mexico.
He picked lemons, strawberries, lettuce and cilantro.
He also worked as a bartender and sang in mariachi bands.
He became a U.S. citizen and now owns a two-bay auto garage, which his brother Bernabe is running in his absence.
When he returned to visit Zacatecas, "I would see my friends from long ago, still in the same problem as before.
I would drive on the roads, and it would ruin my car.
It made me want to do something to help my people," Duran said.
At the same time, he wonders if he can live without the comforts of California and whether his family can adapt.
Duran's wife is not even Mexican, and the couple's 11-year-old daughter, born in Oxnard, does not have a mastery of Spanish.
"I've been in the U.S. for all these years, but I can't get Mexico out of me," he said.
"You want to go back, and then you wonder how to leave everything you've worked for."
Of the three candidates, it is Bermudez who provides the ultimate rags-to-riches saga.
In 1973, he and his wife paid $550 to a "coyote"--a smuggler--to take them to California.
They rode inside the trunk of a car for 149 miles.
Bermudez received U.S. residency in 1982 and in the early 1990s became a U.S. citizen.
The family lived in farm labor camps until Bermudez gradually bought 600 acres near Winters, west of Sacramento, and another farm near Watsonville, Calif., in the early 1990s.
He estimates that his annual income is $300,000.
He bought fancy cars and built a large home with tile and pillars from Mexico.
He added a pool only because "rich people have pools in the United States."
He says he has swum in it once.
Family members play key roles in the farming operation, which employs 700 people, including 200 from Jerez.
It is no secret in Jerez that Bermudez can get as many as 300 temporary visas for Mexicans who want to work his fields.
That disgusts his opponents.
"People don't like the way he's tossing around money and the visas.
It smells," said Salvador Espinosa, one of his opponents who returned to Jerez 10 years ago after 30 years in Pasadena.
Bermudez is expected to win his election.
He is campaigning hard, from factories to stores to schools to public housing.
"The PRI has been saying it will do things for 72 years.
They inaugurate roads and never finish them. . . .
We need to begin with actions," he says as he drives away from a one-room kindergarten, where he promised parents he would install playground equipment whether he won or lost.
Teacher Mirna Salsero is stunned by his promise.
For years, she has asked for help because the school's unimproved land doesn't offer enough for the students.
One mother with a 16-year-old son asks Bermudez to get him a farm worker visa because he's threatening to go with a coyote to Long Beach the next day.
Bermudez says he is too young to qualify for the visa.
"Why don't you have him stay?
We're going to make things better.
I promise," Bermudez says.
At lunch, however, he wonders if he can.
The campaign makes him consider whether he's from Mexico or the United States.
In Jerez, his black dress shirts and sunglasses contrast sharply with the locals' white tops and squinted eyes.
He feels out of place in Jerez, annoyed by slow restaurant service and inefficiency in other businesses and even his own campaign.
But he feels prejudice in the U.S.
Would he ever have even considered running for mayor in Winters?
He laughs at the question and says no one would vote for a Mexican immigrant with a heavy accent.
"I wonder if I'm doing the right thing.
I wonder if I can live here," he says on a campaign stop in Jerez. "
Now I can't turn back.
I made a promise to this election, and I will see what it brings me."
Mark Green tried to assert himself Monday as the Democratic mayoral nominee, but Fernando Ferrer refused to quit the race.
Four days after the primary runoff election, the outcome remained uncertain because of errors discovered in the unofficial results provided to the media.
An audit of the votes completed Monday evening by The Associated Press showed Green's unofficial lead had shrunk from about 30,000 to about 19,000.
The vote totals were 391,297, or 51 percent, for Green and 372,249, or 49 percent, for Ferrer, the Bronx borough president.
The total vote had diminished from about 805,000 to about 763,000.
The tightening race prompted Ferrer, who had conceded Thursday, to backtrack, saying that while he was committed to supporting the Democratic nominee, "We don't know who that nominee is."
But Green, the city's public advocate, insisted Monday he was "looking forward to a formal certification of what is unofficially known now, that I'm the Democratic nominee for mayor."
The winner faces Republican Michael Bloomberg in November.
Thousands of votes were mistakenly entered twice in the unofficial count.
Those results are gathered and entered by the Police Department, which transmits them to the AP.
The AP tabulates the numbers and distributes them to newspapers and broadcasters.
On Friday, the AP began an audit of the results and began to detect errors when it compared the paper canvass sheets from each election district with the numbers that had been entered Thursday night.
There were more than 50,000 paper and absentee ballots as well but many are subject to challenge, and since they tend to reflect the machine vote they are unlikely to affect the outcome.
The Board of Elections has not yet begun its official tally of the votes.
Those results are due Oct. 23.
Many Democrats, especially blacks and Hispanics, viewed the results with suspicion.
"We Democrats have a very serious problem," said Rep. Charles Rangel, a black congressman who had endorsed Ferrer before Thursday's runoff and has called for an investigation of the results.
Rangel and the Rev. Al Sharpton said Monday that the consolidation of some election districts -- the ones where results were counted twice -- may have violated federal election rules.
Sharpton said the consolidation by law should have been approved by the federal government beforehand.
He said he planned to file suit by Wednesday calling for a new runoff or a federal review. 
Copyright 2001 Associated Press
Babies and businesses are named after the suspected terrorist, who is a hero on Pakistan's frontier for his battle against the West.
When his son came into the world in November, Ghani Jan said he knew in an instant who his namesake would be.
"I named him Osama, for Osama bin Laden," Jan, a soft-spoken clerk in the city's electricity department, said as he cradled his smiling son. "
Osama bin Laden is such a good person.
Everybody likes the name."
Bin Laden, the suspected mastermind of the U.S. Embassy bombings in East Africa last year, is a folk hero to the villagers of Pakistan's untamed northwest frontier.
In the year since the bombings, the name Osama has emerged as one of the most popular for newborns.
Bin Laden's name and face also adorn shops, schools, posters and postcards.
In the dusty streets and winding bazaars of this old border town, there is the Osama Cloth House and the Osama School.
An Osama Bazaar holds more than 100 shops, and the Osama Mosque attracts more than 100 families.
Outside town, many merchants have changed the names of their businesses to cash in on the Osama craze: Osama Poultry Farm.
Osama Watchmaker.
Osama Medicines.
And the Osama Knife Center.
"It's good for business," said Irshad Ahmad of Osama Optical, an eyeglass store in the nearby town of Mardan.
"He has given everything for Islam.
He is fighting the holy war all over the world."
While official records are not available, health officials in Peshawar have verified that the name Osama has become extremely popular.
"A lot of people are naming their sons Osama," said Iramullah Khan, a medical officer for the Peshawar government.
"It's just like during the Gulf War, when everyone was naming their sons Saddam."
The Osama boom reflects a widespread admiration for Bin Laden in this region, which borders the Afghan province where the suspected terrorist is thought to be hiding.
Many people here say they admire Bin Laden because he is standing up to the United States, which they say suppresses Islam and bullies the rest of the world.
Some say they were angered by the U.S. cruise missile strikes launched in August against terrorist camps in Afghanistan believed linked to the embassy blasts.
"With their television, adultery, drinking, the West is trying to destroy our culture," said Saleem Khan, a sales clerk who named his son Osama when he was born in March.
"Osama is fighting against the cruelty of the West."
These days, Peshawar buzzes with talk of an imminent U.S. strike against Bin Laden--and of a Bin Laden strike against the United States.
Each day, local newspapers scream warnings of an impending American assault: "U.S. Commandos Arrive in Peshawar," said War, an Urdu-language daily.
"Three U.S. Fleets Reach Gwadar," the Daily Khabrain said, referring to a Pakistani port.
Fears of a U.S. strike against Afghanistan intensified earlier this month when the Clinton administration imposed economic sanctions on the Taliban government in retaliation for its reputed protection of Bin Laden.
The U.S. is offering a $5-million reward for information leading to his arrest and conviction.
Leaders of the Taliban, the doctrinaire Islamic group that controls most of Afghanistan, have vowed to resist U.S. pressure to turn over Bin Laden.
"If America attacks Afghanistan for the second time, then a suicide squad will attack American installations," Rehmatullah Kakazar, Afghanistan's consul general, told the Daily Khabrain.
U.S. officials worry that Bin Laden might be plotting a fresh strike against American citizens.
Last week, U.S. officials issued a warning to Americans in Pakistan after the officials said they had received "credible information" that extremists based in Afghanistan were preparing to attack the U.S. Consulate in Peshawar in the near future, probably with a car or truck bomb.
For some people in Peshawar, the attention accorded Bin Laden has made him seem more powerful--and more dangerous--than he really is.
"America is the world's only superpower, and Osama is only one person," said Hidyath Ullah, deputy secretary-general of Jamaat-i-Islami, Pakistan's largest religious party.
"America is maximizing the stature of Osama bin Laden."
Thousands of riot police surrounded two university campuses where union activists taking part in a strike by state rail and power workers were holed up on Tuesday.
Calling the strike illegal, authorities said they planned to arrest 36 leaders of the walkout who were taking refuge at a Roman Catholic church in central Seoul.
Thousands of auto and machinery workers prepared to walk out later Tuesday to support the rail and electricity workers, who went on strike Monday to demand a shorter work week and oppose a government privatization plan.
There were heavy disruptions in rail traffic Tuesday, but the impact of protests by power workers was limited because their facilities are mostly automated.
Privatization of ineffective state firms is a priority in President Kim Dae-jung's economic reform programs.
Kim started the reforms in the aftermath of the 1997-98 Asian economic crisis.
Workers fear the changes will lead to mass layoffs.
Many striking workers, some armed with iron bars, gathered at Seoul National University and Konkuk University.
Colleges are traditional rallying points for anti-government activists, a legacy of South Korea's pro-democracy student movement and the reluctance of police to enter the campuses.
Gas workers pulled out of the strike hours after it began Monday after reaching a compromise with management.
Union leaders said they expected up to 100,000 workers to join the strike on Tuesday.
"The government should listen to the desperate voice of workers demanding job security," said Lee Nam-soon, head of the Federation of Korean Trade Unions, South Korea's largest labor group.
Lee said he met Labor Minister Bang Yong-suk in overnight negotiations and was to meet him again Tuesday morning before deciding whether to organize a sympathy strike later in the day.
The walkout by rail workers forced authorities to cancel 50 percent of all passenger and freight train operations for the second straight day, officials said.
Nearly a quarter of the 20,000 unionized rail workers were taking part in the strike.
They included 1,500 locomotive operators, about half of the total.
Rail commuters in the Seoul metropolitan area faced delays.
Major roads around large cities were jammed with motorists who could not use trains.
Shipment of export and import goods was delayed because of the rail strike.
Trucks were used to transport shipments to and from seaports.
The government has proposed introducing a five-day work week.
But labor and management differ over whether to cut wages and paid vacations in return for the shorter work week.
Most South Koreans work a half day on Saturday.
Security guards wearing surgical gloves and facemasks descended on corporate mail rooms Friday as businesses--particularly media and entertainment companies--stepped up the screening of letters and parcels after new anthrax scares at "NBC Nightly News" and the New York Times in New York. 
Mail deliveries at companies such as Warner Bros. , Paramount Studios and Sony Pictures Entertainment were halted.
Employees were warned against opening letters and packages, and firms with mail-room X-ray machines pressed them into use as a measure against other possible threats, such as letter bombs. 
The latest corporate security scramble disrupted business as usual Friday and came only days after many firms had put on extra guards and curtailed public and vendor access to offices and plants in reaction to the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. 
"All security is driven by fear, and right now the fear of the moment is this anthrax scare and the terrorist threat," said Sergio Robleto, a managing director of Kroll Inc.'s North American corporate security practice and a former Los Angeles Police Department homicide detective.
"It's very hard to keep up with the calls right now." 
The concern followed reports that an NBC news employee had tested positive for anthrax after handling a letter containing a white powder addressed to anchorman Tom Brokaw.
Unlike the tabloid photo editor in Florida who died after inhaling anthrax spores, the NBC employee developed a skin lesion after contact with the contagion.
She was reported in good health. 
Also Friday, a New York Times reporter who has covered Osama bin Laden's terrorist network received a letter containing a powdery substance, which was under investigation. 
Although investigators said they knew nothing to suggest a coordinated attack on news outlets, media and entertainment companies were swift to review and tighten mail operations. 
Warner Bros. in Burbank temporarily suspended mail service in and out of the studio, sent its mail-room employees home Friday and recommended they be tested for possible infection.
Studio Chairman Barry Meyer said the testing was a precaution and did not come in response to any threat. 
In an e-mail to employees, Warner Bros. said the company had instructed its mail carriers, including FedEx and UPS , to hold pickups and deliveries through Monday.
"We encourage the use of fax and e-mail to help mitigate any temporary impact to operations," the e-mail said. 
At Paramount Studios in Hollywood, mail delivery on the lot was halted Friday, and unopened mail was sent back to the mail room, spokeswoman Nancy Kirkpatrick said.
"They are just taking every precaution." 
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer , which leases space in a Santa Monica office complex, began screening all mail Sept. 20, after the FBI met with all of the studio officials to inform them that a reliable source at an unnamed foreign intelligence service passed along information that a Hollywood studio would be targeted. 
"We're definitely on a heightened alert," spokeswoman Lea Porteneuve said.
"We're scrutinizing everything that comes in very carefully." 
Sony Pictures Entertainment suspended the delivery of incoming mail Friday with plans to resume mail delivery Monday morning. 
Walt Disney Co. in Burbank, like many companies, declined to detail added security measures.
Spokesman Chris Castro said there had been no threats against Disney or information suggesting the company was a target. 
At the Los Angeles Times, Publisher John Puerner directed employees to return unopened mail to the mail room for screening and to report anything that appeared to be a foreign substance to security. 
At the San Francisco Chronicle, security representatives and managers met with mail-room personnel, and employees were briefed on the steps to take if they receive a piece of suspicious mail, said Joe Brown, director of public relations. 
Viacom Inc., owner of the CBS network, and Newsweek magazine also stopped mail deliveries. 
Kroll's Robleto canceled a weekend trip to help respond to a surge in requests from corporations that handle large volumes of mail for top-to-bottom reviews of their mail operations. 
They want to know "how do the people handling the mail do it safely," he said.
"There is concern for the mail carriers themselves.
Some companies have opted to stop delivering the mail until they have set up systems to protect them that they can feel confident about." 
He said some companies are curtailing aspects of their business that rely heavily on incoming mail until extra screening measures were in place. 
Corporate security consultants are advising clients to scrutinize mail carefully for signs of tampering or suspicious contents, including strange odors, poor handwriting, an unusual return address or no return address.
Mail without a specific department or employee named in the address also should raise suspicions, they said. 
Mail wrapped in an oil-proof covering, such as brown paper with a wax coating, and mail that is stamped instead of metered also are clues to watch for, said Elaine Carey, a senior vice president with Control Risks Group, a global business risk consulting firm. 
"It's the same things you would be looking for with a bomb except it's not ticking," she said.  
Times staff writers Corie Brown, Meg James and Ronald D. White contributed to this report.
Phone lines and some offices stay open.
Trade requests are postponed until markets reopen.
U.S. mutual fund companies, which hold a combined $7 trillion in assets, were jolted by Tuesday's terrorist attacks, and some firms took extra security measures but said investors need not worry about account access or records.
Discount brokerage giant Charles Schwab Corp. evacuated its World Trade Center branch, and the firm's New York employees were believed to be safe, said spokesman Glen Mathison, speaking from the firm's thinly staffed San Francisco headquarters.
Customer phone lines remained open, and Schwab's offices across the nation were "staying open as much as they can," he said.
Like other firms, Schwab, which operates a major mutual fund supermarket as well as the leading online stock brokerage, was watching developments to determine today's staffing needs and any other steps it may take this week.
Boston-based Fidelity Investments , the nation's largest fund company with about $565 billion in its stock and bond funds, shut investor centers Tuesday in Los Angeles, New York, San Francisco and other cities.
But phone lines and some of its about 80 centers stayed open.
For three major fund firms based at the World Trade Center, ramifications of the attack--including any human toll--could not be determined.
A report at financial Web site Morningstar.com noted that the buildings were home to Oppenheimer Funds and Citigroup 's Smith Barney and Salomon Bros. Funds, and Deutsche Bank Asset Management had offices there.
Los Angeles-based Capital Group Cos. shut its five major U.S. offices, including an operation in Rockefeller Center three miles north of the World Trade Center, according to Investor News Service.
The move was made for the "physical safety and mental well-being" of the company's employees, a spokesman said.
Individual investors' reaction to the attacks appeared to be restrained, several fund firms said.
Customer phone call volumes at Fidelity, Vanguard Group and other firms were surprisingly light, according to spokespersons.
"I suspect that a lot of people are simply watching TV," Fidelity spokeswoman Anne Crowley said.
"Typically in market crises we'd expect to have management folks and people like me, who don't normally handle calls, answering the phones to help out," said Rebecca Cohen, spokeswoman for Valley Forge, Pa.-based Vanguard, the second-biggest fund company with nearly $500 billion in stock and bond fund assets.
"
Instead, we sent people home at 3 p.m. EDT rather than 5:30.
We didn't need a call to arms."
At Strong Investments in Milwaukee, spokeswoman Jody Lowe said the firm took additional, unspecified security measures with its computer systems as a precaution, though no problems were reported.
Phone representatives and messages posted at several fund company Web sites explained to investors that any trades investors requested could not be processed until U.S. markets reopen.
At Janus Capital Corp. in Denver, its Web site said: "In light of recent events and the markets' closure, any purchases, redemptions or exchanges placed Tuesday will be priced at the net asset value determined after the next New York Stock Exchange market close.
It is unknown when the NYSE will next open for business."
At Fidelity, investors were told that "market" orders (orders to buy and sell stock at any available price) would not be taken. "
Limit" orders (orders issued to buy or sell only at a specific price or better) were taken but won't be carried out until the market reopens, Crowley said.
Orders to buy or redeem mutual funds were taken and will be executed at "the next available price when the market reopens," she said.
Strong did not take stock or fund trade requests online, Lowe said.
Possible damage to the financial system's infrastructure is yet to be determined, noted Jon Burnham, chairman of Burnham Securities Inc. in midtown Manhattan and manager of the Burnham Fund.
"The concern is what damage, if any, has been done to the trading systems--all the phone lines and computers that process the transactions," he said.
"We just don't know."
Intelligence: Money flows for operation.
Bounty is offered to anyone who helps in Bin Laden's capture or death.
Armed with a virtual blank check from the Bush administration, the CIA is pouring operatives and money into and around Afghanistan, and has decided to pay a bounty to anyone who helps the agency capture or kill Osama bin Laden, officials said Wednesday. 
Within the CIA, the rapid mobilization is called a "surge."
Scores of intelligence officers and analysts, apparently including some recalled from retirement, are being dispatched to outposts in Pakistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and elsewhere. 
Such a surge is necessary because the CIA largely dismantled its local networks and operations in Afghanistan after the retreat of Soviet military forces from the country in 1989, and the collapse of communism soon after. 
The intelligence agency upgraded its efforts after 1998 in a search for Bin Laden, but it has been unable to penetrate his inner circle and thus has failed to detect his plans or whereabouts. 
Although official U.S. policy has barred assassinations since 1976, a senior intelligence official said the agency has spread word that it will reward anyone who helps eliminate Bin Laden.
U.S. officials say the Saudi fugitive is the prime suspect behind the Sept. 11 terror attacks. 
"I'm sure if someone were to deliver to us evidence of his timely demise, we'd find a way to demonstrate our gratitude," said the official. 
Rep. Porter J. Goss (R-Fla.), chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, said that America's noassassination policy has not been abandoned and that its first aim is to capture Bin Laden. 
But he added that different standards apply during wartime. "
In a state of war, you don't go out and assassinate people," he said.
"You take them out." 
Goss added that if Bin Laden was "desperate and he was never going to surrender, then it's pretty obvious that he's going to have a demise." 
The intelligence official indicated the bounty for Bin Laden might exceed the $5 million that the State Department previously has offered for information leading to his arrest or conviction.
Thousands of matchbooks advertising the reward were handed out last year in refugee camps and other sites along the Afghan border. 
The State Department offered a separate $5-million reward this week to "individuals providing information" on those responsible for last month's synchronized skyjackings and crashes of four commercial airliners in New York, suburban Washington and Pennsylvania in which about 5,600 people are dead and missing.
Protection of identities and family relocation, if necessary, was also offered. 
An initial goal of the current CIA campaign, officials said, will be to try to sow dissension in the ranks of the ruling Taliban in hopes of gaining an informant who could help U.S. forces pinpoint and punish Bin Laden and his allies. 
Officers also are likely to probe for vulnerable links between Bin's Laden's terrorist network, known as Al Qaeda, and the surrounding population, such as relatives who provide food, medicine and other support. 
"They have to get support somewhere," said a former CIA agent with experience in the region.
"They probably do have some food stores, but those aren't unlimited." 
He said the ongoing bombing campaign, and pending Special Forces operations, may help U.S. intelligence efforts.
The war may "move people off the fence," he said, predicting that either fear or money may induce Afghans to cooperate. 
"We probably have peripheral information already, and it's a matter of following that information over time," the former official said.
"You want to do it right.
You don't want to misfire and send them deeper underground." 
But the covert campaign will not be easy, especially because the CIA has so few operatives in the region. 
Robert Baer, a former CIA officer in the Middle East and Central Asia, warned that collecting reliable intelligence in Afghanistan is as rough as the parched and rocky countryside. 
"If you're think you're going to penetrate Bin Laden and the Taliban in a couple of weeks, it isn't possible," Baer said. " . . .
It's extremely hostile country.
People are suspicious.
They're insular.
They hate foreigners.
A stranger just can't walk up into one of those valleys and say, 'I'm moving here,' because they'll kill him." 
Baer said the CIA largely abandoned Afghanistan after the Soviet pullout.
"Afghanistan was looked at as a basket case.
You couldn't send Americans in there to work. . . .
You'd have Congress all over you saying why are you sending people to get killed in Afghanistan?
That part of the world was written off." 
As the CIA gears up for a covert campaign, other U.S. intelligence services have refocused their efforts in support of U.S. military operations, from bombing to search-and-rescue missions, officials said. 
They include the National Security Agency, which conducts electronic surveillance and breaks codes, and various Defense Department agencies that provide high-altitude satellite surveillance, detailed mapping and other military intelligence. 
As part of the covert war, intelligence services reportedly are trying to reach out to ethnic Pushtun commanders who might provide a more popular alternative to the fractious ethnic minorities gathered under the banner of the Northern Alliance.
Foreign reporters, unable to reach the rest of the country, have made media stars of the Northern Alliance in recent weeks, but many experts are extremely wary. 
"Anybody who thinks you have a long-term solution by going with the Northern Alliance is not paying attention to history," warned Milton Bearden, who ran the CIA support operations to the moujahedeen during the final years of the Afghan war.
"It would be a disaster, a full-time civil war." 
Yossef Bodansky, author of a book on Bin Laden and director of the House task force on terrorism and unconventional warfare, warned that U.S. intelligence efforts face major obstacles if their plans call for another surrogate war. 
During the 1980s, the CIA worked through the Pakistani intelligence services to provide weapons, aid and billions of dollars to the moujahedeen guerrillas, according to several former CIA officials. 
After suffering 15,000 casualties, the demoralized Soviet military retreated in early 1989.
The CIA continued assistance to rebel forces until the pro-Russian government in Kabul fell in 1992.
The Taliban consolidated its control of the country soon after. 
Bin Laden helped recruit and train fighters from around the Islamic world for the war in the 1980s, but the CIA insists it had no dealings with him.
"The CIA never employed, paid or maintained any relationship whatsoever with Osama bin Laden," CIA spokesman Bill Harlow said. 
Since Sept. 11, the CIA has sought additional cooperation and support from spy agencies and security services around the world, officials said.
Among those with special experience and expertise are Britain, Russia and Pakistan, but the net has been spread far wider. 
"If we succeed in this, it's not because the CIA has got guys from the University of Michigan done up in dark paint running around the hills," said another former CIA official.
"It's because they're talking to the Russians, the Uzbeks, the Egyptians, the Saudis, the Filipinos, all the way down the line." 
The British "have a whole lot of people who were on the ground" during the 1980s war, the official added. 
Russia probably has no agents or credible informants left in the country, according to Oleg Kalugin, a former general in the KGB, the Soviet-era spy service. 
Kalugin said Moscow can assist Washington with Dari and Pashto translators and other services.
"Russia can help with some of the intercepts," said Kalugin, who now lives in the Washington area.
"They have developed good resources in that area, especially coded traffic." 
The Soviet experience offers several red flags, however.
A Soviet veteran of an intelligence unit during the Afghan war warned that although different Afghan ethnic groups may hate one another, they probably hate outsiders even more.
He said almost none of the information his unit ever received was accurate, and his comrades often found themselves ambushed as a result. 
Pakistan remains the most important--and most problematic--U.S. ally in the war. 
The turbulent country's Inter-Services Intelligence Directorate (ISI), Islamabad's chief spy service, has had close and direct contact with the Taliban since it first appeared in 1994.
The ISI since has played a major role in arming, training and at times advising Taliban military forces, according to U.S. officials. 
The ISI also had ties with Bin Laden, according to Pakistani intelligence officials.
It sent Muslim militants to train in his terror camps for guerrilla actions in Indian-controlled portions of Kashmir. 
The issue became an embarrassment after Bin Laden helped orchestrate the truck bombing of two U.S. embassies in East Africa in August 1998 and the Clinton administration sought Pakistan's help in capturing Bin Laden. 
Islamabad began to support the Taliban in an effort to stabilize its 1,500-mile border with Afghanistan, especially as weapons and narcotics began flooding into Pakistan in the early 1990s. 
Moreover, an ethnic Pushtun minority, as well as a fundamentalist camp, within the Pakistan army and high command strongly supported the largely Pushtun Taliban. 
Pakistan's military ruler, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, fired the head of the ISI, Lt. Gen. Mahmood Ahmed, earlier this week.
He was not known as a fundamentalist, but he ran Islamabad's connections to the Taliban. 
Musharraf also changed leadership in five of the Pakistan Army's eight corps commands.
In at least two corps, the changes appeared to be the result of concerns that the commanders were fundamentalists or had Taliban sympathies.    
Times staff writers Rone Tempest in Islamabad and Maura Reynolds in Moscow contributed to this report.
   A key U.S. official on Friday pledged support for Russia's bid to join the World Trade Organization and thanked the Kremlin for backing Washington's campaign against terrorism.
Trade Representative Robert Zoellick said support for Russian WTO membership should not be seen, however, as a reward for its backing of the United States after the Sept. 11 terror attacks on the Pentagon and the World Trade Center.
"Sometimes, tragedy also presents opportunities for those who are alert.
I hope now it will become even more clear than in the past that the United States, Russia, Western Europe and many other countries in the democratic community of nations have an interest in cooperating and working together," Zoellick said at a news conference.
Russian relations, long strained over Washington's plans for a national missile defense and over Russia's war in Chechnya, have improved with the Kremlin's vocal support for the United States campaign against terror.
The Russian media saw that as bettering the country's chances for entering the WTO.
"Some Russian experts believe that relations with Washington that have warmed up over the past few weeks would have an indirect influence on the negotiations," the daily Vremya Novostei said Friday.
A day in advance of Zoellick's declaration, the U.S. Department of Commerce said it was reviewing the Russian petition to be included in the list of market economies worldwide.
Moscow has long bristled at Washington's refusal to acknowledge the free market status of its economy -- one of several obstacles to WTO membership.
Russia has failed to gain admission to the 142-nation WTO despite six years of campaigning, partly because of import barriers used to prop up inefficient state-run enterprises and other trade restrictions.
The Bush administration, while supporting eventual Russian membership in the WTO, had maintained the country needed deeper economic reforms.
President Bush wants the West to stop proping up the Russian economy with hugh loans, as has been the case since the end of the Soviet Union in 1991.
The U.S. leader says internal Russian economic reforms should boost private investment.
Zoellick, hailing Russia's legislative progress in meeting WTO requirements, said a report on its readiness for membership would be ready early next year. 
New York's heroes and their families provide the most memorable moments at an all-star tribute concert.
"The Concert for New York" was memorable, but not for the reasons you might have expected.
This was surely the first time Paul McCartney, Mick Jagger and Elton John were upstaged by the audience.
The musical performances during Saturday's Madison Square Garden concert, broadcast by VH1, were generous, but mostly predictable.
None of the almost two dozen acts matched the drama of repeated scenes of widows, children and co-workers talking about or holding up photos of colleagues or loved ones among the police, firefighters and rescue workers killed in the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
When we think of McCartney or the other pop-rock stars, we have scores of images to choose from--all the times we've seen them in videos, concerts and magazine spreads.
Remembering this night, however, it's going to be hard to shake the memory of Yankee manager Joe Torre, taking a break from the World Series race, to stand on stage next to a youngster who spoke tenderly about missing his father.
We can, too, see Meg Ryan and other film stars all over movie and TV screens, but probably never again accompanied by an attack victim's widow and children wiping tears from their eyes.
If one of the inspired moves of the Sept. 21 all-network telethon, a far more compelling show musically, was to have no studio audience so that all viewers felt equally close to the music, a key decision Saturday was to showcase 6,000 emergency workers and relatives so that the audience would serve as a living memorial to the men and women whose bodies are still trapped in the rubble at the World Trade Center site.
There's always talk at benefits about leaving egos at the door, but this was one of the few times when the phrase didn't seem hyperbolic.
Invariably, the musicians, and the film-TV stars who introduced them, went out of their way to salute the audience.
Despite the many poignant scenes, the tone of the benefit concert was mostly upbeat.
David Bowie got things off to an uplifting start by transforming "Heroes," an idealistic 1977 song about trying to reach for your dreams, into an emotional salute to the courage of the New York fire, police and rescue crews.
Billy Crystal eliminated any lingering tendency toward somberness.
After referring to the anthrax scare, the comedian said things were so tense backstage that it was the first time he had ever seen rock stars "run away from white powder."
Setting us up by suggesting the need for the country to pull together, he delivered another stinger: "Whether we are Christians or Jews or Muslims, we all have to agree on one thing," he said.
"We can never, ever again ... let Mariah Carey make a movie."
In their eagerness to have a mammoth event, the concert organizers were guilty, from a television standpoint at least, of falling into the more-is-better trap with a nearly six-hour program.
Except for the comfort of James Taylor, who sang "Fire and Rain" and "Up on the Roof," and the local-hero spirit of Billy Joel, who contributed "New York State of Mind," the highlights were generated by veteran British rockers.
Just the presence of such major figures as McCartney, Jagger, Keith Richards, Eric Clapton, the Who, John and Bowie was touching.
They have each spoken over the years about how inspired they were by the music and culture of America and how excited they were just to be able to come here as young musicians.
On this night, they appeared to be trying to repay the country with some inspiration of their own.
Clapton teamed with guitarist Buddy Guy on spirit-raising blues numbers rather than turn to the heartache sentiments of his 1992 hit, "Tears in Heaven," which was written after the death of his 4-year-old son in New York.
The surviving members of the Who lifted the crowd's spirits even more with a strong four-song set that included "Baba O'Riley," "Behind Blue Eyes" and the ferocious "Won't Get Fooled Again."
Jagger and Richards lacked the Who's command.
With its blue-collar chorus of "Let's drink to the hard working people," the pair's "Salt of the Earth" may have seemed like a fitting tribute to the night's subjects, but it's too obscure a number, relatively, to stir much response. "
Miss You" fared better, though its theme of romantic breakup seemed off-center as a message of support.
John's "Mona Lisas and Mad Hatters," a song with numerous references to New York City, as well as his teaming with piano partner Joel on "Your Song," were both understated notes of innocence that seemed unusually sweet under the circumstances.
Wearing a New York Fire Department T-shirt, McCartney closed the show on a nice low-key mix of old songs, "I'm Down" and "Yesterday," and new.
Besides two songs from his upcoming album, he introduced "Freedom," a song he wrote after the terrorist attack.
He also led the cast in a cleansing rendition of "Let It Be."
But even the Beatles classic didn't shift the spotlight from the audience.
Though there were moments of bonding among the surviving firefighters calling out their ladder company number, time and again they wanted to bear witness to those who weren't there, the dead--whether by holding up laminated cards with their names or climbing on stage to recite their names.
In one of the evening's defining moments, someone in the crowd caught Jim Carrey's eye as the actor was about to introduce McCartney.
Carrey then leaned down and was handed a framed photo of a missing policeman.
He held the photo high for the camera to see and stared at it admiringly himself. "
That's what a hero looks like."
Times staff writer Paul Lieberman contributed to this report.
Robert Hilburn can be reached via e-mail at robert.hilburn@latimes.com.
Television: CBS and the academy producing the awards show make the move after deciding it would be inappropriate in light of the airstrikes.
After watching the U.S. attacks on Afghanistan unfold all morning, producers of the 53rd annual Emmy Awards decided to cancel Sunday's show--the second such postponement in a month and this time just hours before the ceremony was scheduled to begin.
Even as caterers prepared the post-show dinner, hair stylists primped their star clients and the show's producers rehearsed the planned closing number, "America the Beautiful," word leaked out backstage that CBS and the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences had called off the broadcast in light of U.S. and British airstrikes.
For all the furious coordination that had gone into the show over the last several weeks, the decision to shut down the Emmys emerged in waves, catching people--even the show's venerable producer, Don Mischer--off guard.
Indeed, Mischer, who has had to juggle the differing opinions of top producers in Hollywood about whether the Emmys should proceed at all, ultimately found out about the cancellation after NBC News anchor Tom Brokaw announced it to the nation.
Mischer then emerged from his trailer in a parking area behind the Shrine Auditorium, where the show was to be held, and relayed the information to comedian Ellen DeGeneres, the host, who was relaxing after finishing rehearsal.
Later, DeGeneres said she was disappointed because she believed the show, after lurching back and forth to find an appropriate tone, had achieved a moving mix of pathos and humor that the world would be deprived of seeing.
"I feel so many different things," she said.
"I'm thinking about those poor, innocent people in Afghanistan."
Since Sept. 11, issues of propriety and decorum had touched off a unique discussion within an entertainment industry that is often criticized for its self-absorption.
In the weeks since the attacks, movie studios have pulled releases deemed inappropriate for the times, the beginning of the fall television season was postponed, and celebrity in general became a footnote to history.
And yet, organizers for an event honoring television dramas and situation comedies and the stars who populate them found a way to continue.
Originally scheduled for Sept. 16, less than a week after the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, the Emmys were postponed to Oct. 7 and redesigned as a simulcast from New York to accommodate actors who were reluctant to board a plane for an awards show.
In this atmosphere, the Emmys--compromised and chastened but emboldened to continue nevertheless--were pitched by academy leaders as nothing less than a retort to the terrorists.
By noon Sunday, that retort was preempted, even beyond anything the TV academy or CBS could conjure.
"There's a difference between carrying on and doing something that's inappropriate," Bryce Zabel, the academy's chairman-elect, told reporters at the Shrine. "
That line was reached this morning. . . .
We are not concerned with sending the wrong message.
Things have changed. . . .
America is visibly at war now."
Whether the Emmys will be rescheduled is in doubt, but CBS Television President Leslie Moonves said Sunday that there was near unanimity within Hollywood regarding the cancellation.
"I can honestly say that I didn't speak to one person in the community that was passionate about going on.
And I spoke to about 30 that felt this was the right thing to do," Moonves told reporters gathered backstage at the Shrine.
Moonves said those calls included several from high-profile stars.
"They weren't being jerks or prima donnas," he said.
"They just didn't want to come out and participate."
Emmy planners, led by producer Mischer, a veteran of major television events such as awards shows and the Olympic Games, had taken pains to find a tone to match the mood of the country.
Nominees were to show up in business attire, not formal wear, and the annual Governors Ball was renamed the Unity Dinner.
The show was to include a preamble from retired CBS News anchor Walter Cronkite and filmed tributes to the rescue workers in New York, including one to police officers from Dennis Franz, who plays a hard-bitten cop on the ABC police drama "NYPD Blue."
The telecast was to have closed with an address from New York Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the coast-to-coast singing of "America the Beautiful," with Police Officer Daniel Rodriguez in New York backed up by several hundred singers from USC, Loyola Marymount and Cal State Northridge onstage at the Shrine.
Mischer addressed his crew shortly after 2 p.m. in the auditorium.
For them, rehearsal had started at 9 a.m. and continued under a cloud of uncertainty when news emerged half an hour later that U.S. and Britain had begun airstrikes.
By 10 a.m., additional uniformed and plainclothes security guards were sent to the area, said Gary Moses, security consultant with Pinkerton Security, which handled the Emmys.
Metal detectors originally scheduled to be operational in the early afternoon were set up quickly so that every person admitted to the compound that morning would be scanned.
Mischer, interviewed just before noon as clips from nominated series played on two giant TV screens in the auditorium, said several taped comedy bits had been excised because of the morning's events and that Cronkite and Giuliani were rewriting their speeches.
But Mischer also indicated that he wanted a telecast that would adjust to breaking news.
"If there are news interruptions, I want to air it on the screens," he said.
By 2 p.m., however, Mischer had a different message to deliver to his staff.
"You have all done such an incredible job under circumstances that were unimaginable," he said.
"I think the country and the world really would have been surprised to see how we would do the show ."
Outside the auditorium, workers began to remove props from the red-carpet area.
The Emmys, scheduled to air live on the East Coast at 8 p.m. and three hours later on the West Coast, would have been competing with daybreak in Afghanistan, when the images of war would have changed from the grainy video of night attacks that TV audiences had been witnessing much of the day Sunday.
That apparently factored into the decision by CBS and the academy to again postpone the program, as did a host of other issues.
Although some past breaking news stories have touched off competition within networks between the news and entertainment divisions, CBS News President Andrew Heyward said: "It never got that far because Moonves was expressing grave concerns about the Emmys to begin with."
After Moonves made the decision on the Emmys, Heyward said, CBS News proposed airing a two-hour edition of "60 Minutes" that would include some of the tributes produced for the Emmys.
Neither Zabel nor Moonves would say whether the Emmys would be rescheduled, underscoring the fact that the event is lucrative enough for both the network and the academy to warrant proceeding cautiously.
The reluctance to cancel Sunday's telecast is a sign of the strong commitment to go forward with the event in some form.
But the sentiment Sunday was one of support for CBS' decision.
"This wasn't a decision made out of a sense of fear, but rather out of a sense of appropriateness," said Sandy Grushow, chairman of Fox Television Entertainment Group.
"It would be sad for the entire industry if, at some point in time, the show doesn't go on."
Before this year, the Emmys had never been delayed, much less canceled.
The event proceeded in 1980, in fact, when a Screen Actors Guild strike resulted in a boycott by most of the high-profile nominees.
It has been equally rare for awards shows to be postponed.
The Academy Awards were delayed by one day in 1981 after President Reagan was shot.
As it was, the TV academy's template for this year's awards in part followed a script established by the film academy in 1942--the first Academy Awards to follow the bombing of Pearl Harbor.
That year, the Oscars banned formal attire and called their ceremony a dinner instead of a banquet.  
Times staff writers
Dana Calvo, Greg Braxton, Brian Lowry, Elizabeth Jensen, Gina Piccalo, Louise Roug, Susan King and Ann O'Neill contributed to this report.
Heading for Moscow, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld on Friday said a U.S. defense against missiles can be deployed without breaking a 1972 treaty.
"We will deploy a missile defense, and that can be done with the treaty still in place," Rumsfeld said en route to the Russian capital.
In Moscow, he will talk to his counterpart, Sergei Ivanov, about the war against terrorism in Afghanistan, "the overall relationship with Russia" and missile defense.
Rumsfeld said final decisions on two or three missile defense issues probably would be left for the talks President Bush and Russian President Vladimir Putin will hold in Washington and Crawford, Tex., on Nov. 13-15.
Last week, Rumsfeld postponed parts of missile-shield tests that might violate the Cold War-era treaty with the Soviet Union.
That treaty prohibited a national missile defense.
Bush has called the accord a relic.
Other administration officials have said the President at some point would exercise his right under the treaty to withdraw from it.
A U.S. missile defense that does not violate the treaty would be a limited one.
But the administration's eagerness to get started has been enhanced with the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
A shield is seen by senior officials as a protection not only against rogue states but also terrorist groups like the al-Qaida network.
Bush's talks with Putin also might lead to sharp reductions by as much as two-thirds in U.S. and Russian levels of strategic warheads.
About 6,000 are held by each country.
Bush has said a decision on how much to trim the U.S. arsenal would be based on a U.S. strategic judgment.
The Pentagon is completing its study of strategic needs.
Even so, White House officials said Friday that Bush would like to be able to declare how far-reaching the U.S. cuts would be if Putin was willing to make a similar statement of Russia's cutback intentions.
Any pledges on that front by the two leaders would not be made in the form of a treaty, which Bush has said takes too long to negotiate and needs Senate approval, said the officials, speaking on condition of anonymity.
Nor will Bush insist that reductions in U.S. and Russian stockpiles be equivalent, the officials said.
On a more troubled front, the Bush administration is hoping the talks with Putin will produce an agreement for Russia to curb the sale of advanced technology and weapons to Iran.
Undersecretary of State John R. Bolton, who is accompanying Rumsfeld on the trip, told reporters this week he was very concerned about the transfers and possible links to terrorism.
Iran is one of seven countries designated as a supporter of terrorism by the State Department.
Bush also would like to report to Putin that the 1974 Jackson-Vanik legislation that required Russia to permit Jews to emigrate is being repealed by Congress, which is discussing the measure.
The law, which granted Russia U.S. trade privileges, is a mostly symbolic piece of legislation.
The Soviet Union disintegrated in 1991, and U.S. presidents have given Russia trade rights based on substantial Jewish emigration over the years.
Rumsfeld plans to go from Russia to Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, two former Soviet republics that have borders with Afghanistan.
He also plans to visit Pakistan and India.
Copyright 2001
Associated Press
Iraq denied on Thursday that one of its diplomats met with hijacker Mohammed Atta in the Czech Republic months before the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
Czech Interior Minister Stanislav Gross said last week that Atta met with Ahmad Khalil Ibrahim Samir Al-Ani several weeks before Al-Ani was expelled from Prague in April for conduct incompatible with his diplomatic status.
Gross said on Sunday that Al-Ani was suspected of plotting an attack in Prague, possibly a reference to Radio Free Europe, headquartered in the city.
Iraq has vehemently rejected suggestions that it was involved in the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
In a statement, the Iraqi Foreign Ministry said reports of the meeting were "not true at all."
"The Czech interior minister has intentionally ignored Iraq's repeated denial of involvement in what has happened in the United States and those accused by the American authorities of carrying out the attacks," the statement read.
Iraq also accused Gross of releasing "misleading stories ... to arouse the West against Arabs and Muslims."
Atta, an Egyptian who studied in Germany, was on American Airlines Flight 11 that smashed into the World Trade Center. 
Copyright 2001 Associated Press
Even as the rebel Northern Alliance celebrates its first significant victory in Mazar-i-Sharif, it's important not to lose sight of the real goal for the military campaign in Afghanistan. 
The task for the American forces--fighting primarily from the air--and the rebels operating on the ground isn't just to drive the Taliban from Afghanistan's major cities and establish a new government--difficult as that alone might be.
Top U.S. officials acknowledge that the war won't be successful unless it also prevents the Taliban from holding enough territory in the vast countryside to shelter Osama bin Laden and his terrorist network.
And that could prove a much more daunting assignment for the Northern Alliance without greater American help on the ground. 
"Remember, the goal of this mission is to make it impossible to use Afghanistan as a terrorist base for Al Qaeda," says a senior U.S. official. "
So a circumstance in which he can use part of the country is not acceptable." 
That's a real danger, though.
Afghanistan has suffered through virtually uninterrupted civil war since the Soviet Union withdrew its forces in 1989--after itself failing to subjugate the countryside.
The conflict has been perpetuated primarily because none of the interests involved has been strong enough to completely subdue the others. 
When the forces that now constitute the Northern Alliance ruled the country in the early 1990s, "Afghanistan was in a state of virtual disintegration," writes Pakistani journalist Ahmed Rashid in his compelling book "Taliban."
"The country was divided into warlord fiefdoms and all the warlords had fought, switched sides and fought again in a bewildering array of alliances, betrayals and bloodshed." 
The Taliban exerted more effective control after they swept into power in 1996.
But even they were never able to dislodge the Northern Alliance--the remnants of the old government--from the northern strongholds where they controlled from 10% to 15% of the country (more by their estimation).
When the U.S. intervened last month, the two sides had been stalemated for years, neither able to roll back the other. 
Even if the Northern Alliance, with American help, ultimately drives the Taliban from power, the risk is that the two sides will simply trade places.
The Northern Alliance, operating with the broader political coalition that the U.N. is now working to assemble, could move into Kabul and control much of the country.
But the Taliban, reversing the Northern Alliance's own exodus, could take to the hills, probably around Kandahar, the movement's spiritual home in the southeastern corner of the country. 
Unless the Northern Alliance could hunt down the Taliban remnant more effectively than the Taliban pursued the Northern Alliance when the roles were reversed, that could leave the radical Islamic movement with control of enough territory to both threaten the new government with guerrilla attacks--and continue sheltering Bin Laden. 
Ivo Daalder, a national security aide under President Clinton, says that prospect is "one of our true nightmare scenarios" in Afghanistan. "
Maybe there is a post-Taliban Afghanistan," he says.
"But there is a possibility you will have a large Taliban-like guerrilla capability present inside of Afghanistan that you will have to deal with.
Is it any wonder why the United Nations says they are not going to put peacekeepers in that kind of situation?" 
Haron Amin, the Northern Alliance's representative in Washington, is more optimistic that the Taliban can be eradicated as an effective force.
During its years in exile, the Northern Alliance was sustained--at least at subsistence levels--by aid from countries such as Iran and Russia that opposed the Taliban. 
With the Taliban now so isolated, it would be unlikely to receive support from any government, he predicts.
And, he argues, the Taliban's rule has so alienated the country that a guerrilla Taliban force would be unable to count on much support from the general population.
"For them to be able to sustain themselves without outside support--they couldn't do it," he says. 
But that may be overly optimistic.
Even if denied sponsorship from another government, a Taliban remnant could receive aid from radical Islamic networks and reinforcement from sympathizers in the thousands of religious schools across the border in Pakistan.
If Bin Laden remains allied with them, he would undoubtedly generate resources and recruits as well. 
These are some of the reasons that a senior U.S. intelligence official, briefing reporters earlier in the war, warned that it will be much more difficult to eliminate the Taliban as an effective force than it will be to drive them from unified control of the country. "
The Taliban is unlike anything we've ever seen before," the official said.
"You can find vulnerabilities that are strategic and operational . . .
but if you try to completely destroy them, that's a lot more difficult, particularly when they believe themselves to be based on an idea.
" 
The good news is that American officials recognize the danger--and flatly insist that an informal partition of Afghanistan is unacceptable. "
Of course everybody understands that's a possibility," says the senior policymaker.
"But it is unacceptable for territory to be used by Bin Laden and we will do whatever we have to do to meet that condition." 
That could be quite a bit more than the U.S. has been willing to do so far.
American officials acknowledge they have made little progress in encouraging an indigenous opposition in southern Afghanistan, where the Taliban is strongest.
And the Northern Alliance, which has little representation from the Pushtun tribes that dominate the south, is unlikely to launch a full-scale southern invasion on its own.
Indeed, as Olivier Roy, a leading French expert on Afghanistan, told The Times' Robin Wright last week, such an attack could prove counterproductive by encouraging Pushtun nationalists to rally around the Taliban. 
If all goes well in the coming months, the Northern Alliance may broaden its control over the northern half of the country and force the Taliban from Kabul.
But it's difficult to imagine the rebels completely subduing the Taliban--first in Kandahar and then as a guerrilla force in the hills--on their own.
It may take American boots, in the snow and the dust, to truly stamp out this threat. 
Ronald Brownstein's column appears every Monday.
See current and past Brownstein columns on The Times' Web site at: http://www.latimes.com/brownstein .
Victims:
He has buried 10 of small town's young people, and there are more to come.
The homilies are coming harder and harder.
Defense: Rumsfeld, en route to Moscow, says military can't slow down its campaign while Afghans organize new leadership.
He is to visit Central Asian allies.
Opposition: Relatives say Hamid Karzai moved into mountains to avoid capture.
Protests continue in Pakistan but are largely peaceful.
Vote:
A requirement that screeners of passengers and baggage be federal workers is rejected, setting up a showdown with Senate's version of the measure.
Military:
In effort to aid foes of the Taliban, Washington will at least triple number of troops already in Afghanistan.
Iran:
Embassy site where 52 Americans were held for 444 days is part museum and part carnival.
Some lawmakers lament new restrictions at the U.S. Capitol, an enduring symbol that has survived bombs and bullets. 
South Asia: Dissenters vow to continue demonstrations in spite of new government measures designed to quell opposition to U.S. strikes on Afghanistan.
Politics: DreamWorks executive has a sizable edge over the assemblyman in the contest for the 2nd District council seat.
An Afghan tribal leader who hoped to rally anti-Taliban forces in southern Afghanistan was in a serious fight with Taliban soldiers early today after surviving a gun battle Thursday, according to family members and associates in Quetta.
Summit:
As Bush tries to rally support for the war on terrorism, he tells APEC members that the U.S. will do its best to avoid civilian casualties.
In a day of intense wartime diplomacy, the leaders of China and Russia appealed to the United States on Saturday to end its military campaign in Afghanistan as quickly as possible, while President Bush countered that the fight "to save the civilized world" will require patience and staying power. 
But Bush, attending a Pacific Rim summit here, bowed to concerns of other members of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum by promising that U.S. forces will do their best to avoid civilian casualties. 
The president said the military campaign is now "encircling" the militants of the Al Qaeda terrorist network and is making good progress in destroying their hideaways.
And he asserted that the defenses of the extremist Islamic Taliban regime are being dismantled.
He warned, however, that the war on terrorism will include "moments of sacrifice." 
Bush met with several Pacific Rim leaders in this seaside city Saturday, the first full day of the APEC summit, where the president is trying to build support from the group's 20 other members for his fight against terrorism. 
In talks with Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad, Bush said, he assured him that the United States is sensitive to fears of backlash in Muslim countries caused by collateral damage from Operation Enduring Freedom. 
"He is concerned about the deaths of innocent people in Afghanistan, and I assured him I am too," Bush told reporters. 
Mahathir later told Malaysian journalists that he had informed Bush that he could not back the military attacks in Afghanistan.
"I explained to him the anger and frustration of the Muslim world," Mahathir was quoted as saying by Malaysia's state-run Bernama news agency. 
Despite strong international support here for a united fight against extremism, Bush is coming under growing pressure in Shanghai to limit operations that spill over onto Afghan civilians. 
After their own talks here, Russian President Vladimir V. Putin and Chinese President Jiang Zemin also urged the United States to move quickly from military operations to efforts to reach a political settlement. 
"We are in favor of the fight against terror, but the strikes should be aimed at clear targets and refrain from injuring innocent civilians," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhu Bangzao told a news conference. 
Russian spokesman Alexei Gromov said Moscow and Beijing also agreed that any negotiations on a new government in Afghanistan should be carried out through the United Nations. 
Bush said the so-called Shanghai Accord on terrorism, expected to be formally approved today by APEC leaders, will provide a new international framework to deny terrorists sanctuary, funding, materiel and moral support. 
"Together, we will patiently and diligently pursue the terrorists from place to place until justice is done," he told a meeting of international business and government leaders.
"This is the urgent task of our time.' 
Bush said the international business community had already scored a major victory against terrorism by not succumbing to extremists' efforts to damage the global economic system. 
"The terrorists hoped world markets would collapse," he said.
"But markets have proven their resiliency and fundamental strength." 
The APEC summit symbolized the commitment to continue opening free markets, he added. 
Since 1975, China's per capita gross domestic product has soared by 513%; in South Korea, 73% of the homes have personal computers, and Indonesia has cut its infant mortality rate by half since 1980, Bush told global business leaders at the CEO summit. 
The president pledged that the United States will take the initiative to restore what he called "economic momentum" to reignite global growth.
Despite the slowdown worldwide, exacerbated by the Sept. 11 attacks in the United States, Bush said, the world economy could build on encouraging moves such as economic reform in Japan, the Philippines and Indonesia, new sources of capital in Russia and Mexico, and imminent membership for China and Taiwan in the World Trade Organization. 
Improving both openness and security will be difficult, Bush acknowledged.
But the Sept. 11 attacks also have created opportunities for nations to strengthen and rethink relationships, Bush said. 
"We share more than a common enemy," he said.
"We share a common goal: to expand our ties of trade and trust." 
And trade, he said, is the engine of economic growth and prosperity that will in turn address the kind of grievances that give rise to extremism.
"One of the three most important challenges in fighting terrorism is to ensure that freedom and prosperity are widely shared.
The great alternative to hate is hope," Bush said. 
"To seize the hopeful opportunities of market and trade, people must be educated and healthy, and governments must be fair and just and committed to the rule of law," he said. 
Many Asian governments, including those of APEC members such as China, Malaysia, Singapore and Brunei, are holdouts against the democratic tide that has swept the world over the last two decades. 
In a strong warning, Bush said no government should use the new global war on terrorism as an excuse to persecute minorities seeking basic rights within their own borders.
"Ethnic minorities must know that their rights will be safeguarded--that their churches, temples and mosques belong to them," the president said. 
"We must respect legitimate political aspirations and, at the same time, oppose all who spread terror in the name of politics or religion," he said.
Stepping up the legal war against terrorism, President Bush issued a broadly worded order late Tuesday that allows the use of special military courts to try suspected terrorists, whether they are picked up in Afghanistan, other countries or in the United States.
People designated as terrorists by the president shall be "placed under the control of the secretary of Defense," the order says, and he will have "exclusive jurisdiction" over them.
They may not seek the aid of "any court of the United States," nor of "any court of any foreign nation or any international tribunal."
"These are obviously extraordinary times, and the president has to have as many options as possible," Justice Department spokeswoman Mindy Tucker said.
The military order does not preclude the Justice Department from bringing traditional prosecutions against suspected terrorists, but it gives the administration the power to bring military prosecutions against noncitizens--both inside and outside the United States--with suspected terrorist ties, she said.
Also Tuesday, Atty.
Gen. John Ashcroft directed law enforcement authorities to interview more than 5,000 foreign men living in the United States to determine whether they have information that might prevent terrorist attacks.
The list includes men ages 18 to 33 who entered the United States on non-immigrant visas since Jan. 1, 2000, from specific countries.
Most of the men hold passports from Middle Eastern nations, the Justice Department said.
Ashcroft said that all interviews would be voluntary and that interview subjects would not be detained.
The prospect of military tribunals in the United States alarmed some advocates of civil liberties and immigrant rights.
"First, the president must justify why the current system does not allow for the timely prosecution of those accused of terrorist activities," said Laura W. Murphy, director of the American Civil Liberties Union's Washington office.
"
Absent such a compelling justification, today's order is deeply disturbing and further evidence that the administration is totally unwilling to abide by the checks and balances that are so central to our democracy."
The two orders were the latest in a series of actions the Bush administration has taken against the threat of terrorism.
Ashcroft recently expanded the Justice Department's authority to monitor some jailhouse conversations between inmates and their lawyers, and he has broadened government power to deny visas and to deport people deemed supportive of terrorist activities.
White House spokeswoman Anne Womack said Bush's order "gives the president an additional tool to use as he sees fit to fight the war on terrorism and bring foreign terrorists to justice."
"This is not unprecedented," Womack added.
"This gives the president the option of pursuing this if necessary.
It does not establish the military commission.
It just establishes the framework under which one could be established."
Bush's order, issued in his role as commander in chief of the military, declares an "extraordinary emergency" and says that individuals who commit "violations of the laws of war" should be tried by a military tribunal.
But it goes on to define broadly the "individuals subject to this order," saying that they include people who have "aided or abetted" terrorists or aimed "to cause injury to the United States, its citizens, national security, foreign policy or economy."
"It is not practicable," the order says, to apply "the principles of law and the rules of evidence generally recognized in the trial of criminal cases" in the United States to these military trials.
The order does not apply to U.S. citizens, but it could apply to foreigners detained in the United States on suspicion of committing terrorist acts or even "aiding and abetting" terrorists, she said.
It is unclear who precisely is the target of the proposed military tribunals.
With the Taliban on the run in Afghanistan, U.S. officials may be laying the groundwork for capturing and trying Osama bin Laden and the leaders of his Al Qaeda network.
If U.S. troops take Bin Laden alive, Tuesday's order allows the military to try him in a secret, closed proceeding abroad.
But the military tribunals could be used more widely, including for people picked up in the United States.
Both White House and Justice Department officials said the administration intends to give itself the option of trying suspected terrorists in the secret military courts here.
Claire Buchan, a White House spokeswoman, stressed that the order applies only to "noncitizens."
And, in a military or civilian court or not, the suspected terrorists would get "a full and fair trial," she said.
But the administration may run into trouble in the federal courts and the court of public opinion.
The U.S. Constitution applies to "persons," not just citizens, and the Supreme Court has said in the past that the government may not close the courthouse doors to people.
Anyone can file a writ of habeas corpus asking for a judge to take up their case.
In the past, however, courts have drawn a distinction between military combatants and people who are picked up for crimes such as spying and sabotage.
While the combatants have been tried before military tribunals, the United States has tried spies and foreign agents in its criminal courts.
Philip Cave, a former Navy defense attorney and prosecutor who is now a board member of the nonprofit National Institute of Military Justice, said Bush's order "is certainly without precedent since World War II," when the U.S. used military tribunals to try Nazi saboteurs and Japanese.
One constitutional scholar said Bush's order is fraught with potential problems.
"Based on a Supreme Court precedent from World War II, there is a strong argument that this is constitutional," said Erwin Chemerinsky, a constitutional law professor at USC.
"But I am very troubled by it because it allows the government to try people without having to follow the Constitution's protections."
Chemerinsky, who was giving a speech to prosecutors Tuesday night on "Civil Liberties in the Fight Against Terrorism," said Bush's directive could essentially do away with public trials for some suspected terrorists and trials by juries of their peers, two of the most fundamental rights under the Constitution.
Cave noted that military tribunals give the government a much greater chance of conviction than traditional courts and allow military prosecutors to shield intelligence information that they might be forced to disclose in civilian courts.
Jonathan Turley, a constitutional law professor at George Washington University who has defended military cases, called the order "extremely troubling" and said it "certainly has the appearance of putting a thumb on the scale of justice to guarantee a better outcome."
The order "is likely to be viewed with great suspicion, not just abroad but in the United States," Turley said.
"To create an ad hoc tribunal undermines the legitimacy of the proceedings."
John Dean, former counsel to President Nixon, wrote recently that he supports the idea of using the military tribunals against terrorists but said it would require an act of Congress.
"Congress should pass an act--in part because terrorism is very different from other crime," Dean wrote.
Citing the terrorist acts of Sept. 11, he added: "It would trivialize what was done to treat it as ordinary crime."
Dean added that jurors' names would be publicized, placing them at risk, and terrorists could walk free based on legal technicalities such as failure to read them their Miranda rights.
"Such tribunals are more efficient, less costly and more likely to provide swift and sure justice," Dean wrote.
A Bush administration official said there were several reasons why Bush decided to issue the order.
The official, who asked not to be identified, said the president determined that bringing an accused terrorist to trial in the United States "could put a lot of lives at risk" and pose major security concerns because the location of the trial would be made public.
Womack said Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld will draw up the particulars of such a commission and make the decisions on details such as who would represent those charged in such a military tribunal and where the trials would be held.
The Defense Department had no comment Tuesday night.
In 1942, when Nazi Germany landed eight saboteurs on the East Coast, they were treated as military combatants.
They were tried in a secret military court in Washington, were convicted and most were hanged.
The Supreme Court refused their pleas to intervene.
This is often cited as the strongest precedent for allowing secret, military tribunals.
But it was also a special case, because the Germans were at war with the United States and had landed military agents on U.S. shores.
Meanwhile, the Justice Department began preparing to have authorities interview more than 5,000 foreign men.
Ashcroft asked the 94 U.S. attorneys offices to use local anti-terrorism task forces to ensure that everyone on the list was interviewed.
He added: "We recognize that this will be a time-consuming and complicated task, but it is critical that we expand our knowledge of terrorist networks operating within the United States."
The Justice Department compiled the names from lists furnished by immigration and State Department records of foreigners who entered the country on tourist, student and business visas.
Tucker said those on the list were chosen not because of their country of origin but because of where they were before they entered the United States.
Justice Department officials described the countries as places "from which a terrorist might be likely to plot possible additional attacks and then enter the U.S. . . .
based on intelligence information about past Al Qaeda operations.
"
The men on the list "are not being questioned, they are being interviewed," Tucker said.
"This is nothing more than questioning the neighbors on the street of a person who was robbed.
These are people who are visiting our country, and we are expecting that they would cooperate with our law enforcement efforts just as we would expect an American citizen to cooperate."
Arab American and civil liberties groups denounced the plan as racial and religious profiling.
"This type of sweeping investigation carries with it the potential to create the impression that interviewees are being singled out because of their race, ethnicity or religion," said Nihad Awad, executive director of the Council on American-Islamic Relations.
Lucas Guttentag, a lawyer with the American Civil Liberties Union in New York, said such an effort, if not undertaken with great sensitivity, "could undermine collaboration and confidence in the very communities that the government is seeking information from.
"
A veteran Washington defense lawyer who supports Bush had a different perspective.
"Keep in mind this is wartime," said the attorney, who asked that his name not be used.
"Things like this are necessary in times of war."
Times staff writer Robert L. Jackson contributed to this report.
Health officials Sunday confirmed a new case of inhalation anthrax in a New Jersey postal worker, that state's first case of the most serious form of the disease.
AFGHANISTAN U.S. warplanes are pounding Taliban front-line troops with increasing frequency and to devastating effect, targeting primarily soldiers on the move.
Sixteen worshipers and a security guard are slain in a Roman Catholic church in eastern Pakistan, underscoring the deep domestic difficulties facing the government as it attempts to help the United States in its war on terrorism.
The head of United Airlines quits under pressure after his warning that the huge airline might "perish" sparked an uproar among its workers, the latest twist in the ongoing saga of the struggling U.S. airline industry.
Clinging to photographs of loved ones, family and friends of the World Trade Center victims mourn at the scene of destruction in a mass memorial service.
Just one day after President Bush criticized airport security legislation that would require all baggage and passenger screeners to be federal employees, a top White House aide said Bush would nevertheless sign the bill if Congress approved it.
In the latest incident of an errant U.S. attack, news reports from Kabul said 13 civilians were killed when airstrikes aimed at the Taliban hit residential neighborhoods.
Funding: Cutting off the source of money may not shut down groups that operate on shoestring budgets. 
Terrorists don't need much money to carry out their attacks.
And what they do need can often be moved through informal channels beyond the reach of U.S. law enforcement. 
Experts say those realities pose serious problems for the Bush administration as it tries to disrupt the flow of funds to groups such as Al Qaeda, founded by accused terrorist Osama bin Laden and blamed for the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. 
Experts said that although tracking the money may yield valuable leads and deprive terrorists of some funds, it would be naive to think the U.S. could put the groups out of business that way. 
"If they're thinking they can shut down Al Qaeda financially and therefore shut down Al Qaeda . .
.
it's pie in the sky," said Kenneth B. Katzman, a former Middle East specialist with the Congressional Research Service who formerly worked for the CIA. 
Great destruction can be accomplished on a shoestring budget, analysts say.
According to some estimates, the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center, which killed six people and injured more than 1,000, cost the conspirators less than $50,000 for bomb materials and other expenses. 
The recent suicide hijackings, believed to have killed more than 6,000, were not expensive to mount, either.
Government officials and terrorism experts have estimated the total cost at $250,000 to $2 million--"chump change," in one expert's words. 
Suicide bombers aren't in it for the money, and the 19 hijackers lived frugally in cheap housing--their only significant expense being the flight training that helped them turn passenger jets into firebombs. 
Credit card issuers will eat some of those costs, because the hijackers paid for plane tickets and other items with plastic. 
Terrorists have shown enterprise in earning money, thereby limiting the need for financial support from outside sponsors.
An example surfaced this year in the trial of four men who took part in the 1998 U.S. Embassy bombings in Kenya and Tanzania, for which Bin Laden also has been indicted. 
According to testimony in the case, one of the conspirators was sent to the Kenyan coast in advance of the attacks to help run an Al Qaeda-owned fishing business there. 
Other terrorists have supported themselves through criminal activities, such as the three men convicted in the millennium bombing case that involved a failed scheme to attack Los Angeles International Airport.
The three men, members of a Montreal-based terrorist cell, supported themselves through bank and credit card fraud and by peddling forged documents, according to testimony at their trials. 
But the ability of terrorists to do a lot with a little is only one obstacle on the money trail, analysts say.
Another is that simply developing a precise understanding of Bin Ladin's finances will be extremely difficult. 
Historically, lax banking regulations and limited cooperation from other countries have hampered such investigations by the U.S.
But even with more help from foreign governments, experts say tracking and shutting down Al Qaeda's assets will be hard. 
"He's had years . . .
to lay the groundwork for these terrorist operations, so I'm sure he's taken great pains to camouflage his assets," said Bruce Hoffman, an expert on terrorism with the Rand Corp. 
Whatever Al Qaeda funds are in conventional banks and investment funds are almost certain to be in the names of people or entities that are not known to be linked with Bin Laden and may not be using their real names. 
It will be "very hard to trace and identify what assets specifically belong to or are under the control of Osama bin Laden," said Leonard Gumport, a Los Angeles lawyer who has served as a bankruptcy trustee and court-appointed assets investigator. 
"If he's trying to conceal his assets and has been doing it for years and years, you will have to penetrate a maze of shell entities, bank accounts in jurisdictions with secrecy laws and people who are willing to hold assets for him in their own names," Gumport said. 
Others believe Al Qaeda does not even primarily rely on banks, instead using individuals to ferry cash or moving money between countries by use of the hawala, or money broker system, that is widely used in the Middle East and Indian subcontinent. 
"This money is all just moving in channels that are totally alien to the Western banking system," Katzman said. 
In its effort to trace Bin Laden's money, the U.S. government is having trouble separating fact from folklore.
Basic financial information, such as the extent of his holdings, remains largely a matter of conjecture. 
Bin Laden's father built a multibillion-dollar construction empire, and his family has been among the richest non-royalty in Saudi Arabia.
Taking into account his many brothers, Bin Laden's share of his father's estate has been estimated at $300 million. 
Some officials believe his current net worth is about one-tenth of that, as a result of his lavish support for the Afghan war against the Soviet Union and for terrorist causes.
Other analysts suspect he is all but tapped out. 
But whether Bin Laden still controls a personal fortune "doesn't matter in the least, because he's been able to raise so much from his ideological supporters," said Jonathan M. Winer, who was deputy assistant secretary of state for international law enforcement during the Clinton administration. 
Indeed, Al Qaeda is believed to get substantial support from wealthy Middle Eastern businessmen who either sympathize with his message or are giving protection money. 
Authorities say Al Qaeda also receives money diverted from Islamic charities that ostensibly aid victims of poverty and war. 
The testimony of a former Al Qaeda insider and defector is the biggest source of public information about Bin Laden, Al Qaeda and their finances.
Testifying this year in the embassy bombing trial, Jamal Ahmed al-Fadl described the complex web of business ventures operated by Al Qaeda from 1991 to 1996, when the organization was based in Sudan. 
Al-Fadl, who described himself as a member of Al Qaeda's "money and business committee," told of arriving in Sudan with $57,000 in cash to begin renting houses and farms. 
He said Al Qaeda quickly established a mini-empire of at least seven businesses involved in such areas as trucking, heavy construction, produce, currency trading and export and import trade. 
Al Qaeda purchased farms, including one of about 50,000 acres.
They were used for explosives and weapons training and to grow sesame, peanuts and corn, which were exported to Europe and to Cyprus, Al-Fadl said. 
One of the companies, Khartoum Tannery, was acquired from the government as payment for a highway built by Al Qaeda's Hijra Construction Co., Al-Fadl said. 
Once, Al-Fadl said, he was sent to Croatia to look at investment opportunities in businesses the Croatian government was selling. 
Another time, he said, he traveled to Jordan with $100,000 in $100 bills to give to Al Qaeda allies there.
On two occasions, he bought strings of about 50 camels to smuggle rifles from Sudan to a militant Egyptian group. 
At the time, Al-Fadl said, Bin Laden's group was using a war relief organization in Baku, Azerbaijan, to smuggle Muslim fighters into Chechnya to fight for independence from Russia.
He said it cost Al Qaeda about $1,500 for each fighter it sponsored. 
Al-Fadl testified that in late 1993 or early '94, he tried to negotiate the purchase of enriched uranium, holding talks with a Sudanese government official and a middleman who were offering the canister of uranium for $1.5 million plus a commission for themselves. 
Al-Fadl said that before the negotiations concluded, he was replaced by another Al Qaeda official.
He said he never learned whether the deal was consummated.
Rescuers sifted through caked mud Tuesday seeking survivors of flooding and mudslides that killed nearly 600 people in the Algerian capital.
More rain was forecast.
The official death toll stood at 579.
Some newspapers in Algiers estimated that the toll could reach 1,000 when devastated areas are searched.
More than 300 people remained hospitalized.
Mud clogged the narrow streets, where residents expressed fury at what they called the government's lax response to a weekend mudslide triggered by heavy rains that devastated several neighborhoods.
"We are revolted by the complete absence of the authorities," said Messaoud, a 52-year-old administrator who declined to give his last name.
"The army didn't even send helicopters to rescue people who sought refuge on the roofs, but when it comes to cracking down on a demonstration with tear gas, the helicopters are there."
France was sending a cargo plane with tents, beds, blankets and water purification equipment to its former colony.
The sun was out Tuesday for the first time in three days, but weather forecasters said rain would soon begin again.
The International Skating Union on Friday denied the Russian Figure Skating Federation's protest of the judging in the women's figure skating competition, leaving Irina Slutskaya with the silver medal and Sarah Hughes of Great Neck, N.Y., with the gold.
The protest, filed by Russian Figure Skating President Valentin Piseev, was based on Tuesday's short program "where Slutskaya was definitely the best but was still placed second," and on her presentation scores in Thursday's long program.
Slutskaya was ranked second in the short program and second again in the long program.
She complained after Thursday's finale that her presentation scores didn't reflect the effort she had made to improve them. "
In other competitions I have higher marks in the second mark," said Slutskaya, who was expected to vie for the gold with U.S. champion Michelle Kwan.
"They're always 5.8s and 5.9s out of 6.0 , and here I received 5.6s.
I was shocked."
referee Britta Lindgren denied the protest without comment.
Although Russian Olympic Committee President Leonid Tyagachev said Thursday his country was threatening to pull out of the Games and boycott Sunday's closing ceremony to protest what it alleges is an anti-Russian bias, Russian President Vladimir V. Putin on Friday said there will be no withdrawal.
However, he maintained North American athletes are being favored over Russian athletes.
Russian politicians and sports officials have complained of unfair treatment in cross-country skiing, where the Russian women's relay team dropped out after leader Larissa Lazutina was banned for having excessively high levels of hemoglobin, as well as in figure skating and men's hockey.
In an earlier dispute that threatened to overshadow the Games, Russians Elena Berezhnaya and Anton Sikharulidze won the gold medal in pairs skating but later watched as their top rivals, Jamie Sale and David Pelletier of Canada, were given duplicate gold medals after a judging scandal was uncovered.
Russia also complained about biased officiating in the Olympic hockey tournament but did not carry out threats to pull its men's team from the semifinals.
Russia lost to the U.S., 3-2, in a semifinal Friday.
"There's not much you can do about it right now," Russian hockey Coach Viacheslav Fetisov said.
"An agreement's been signed that is designed to have a final between Canada and the USA.
You have this final, you have NHL referees....
They live here, and they know the North American players.
"Russia isn't alone in complaining North American athletes have received favored treatment.
South Korea earlier this week also threatened to boycott the closing ceremony and protested to the Court of Arbitration for Sport over the disqualification of short-track speedskater Kim Dong-Sung.
Kim finished first in the 1,500-meter race Wednesday night, but American Apolo Anton Ohno was given the gold medal because the referee said Kim blocked Ohno with half a lap to go.
On Friday, Francois Carrard, director general of the IOC, said South Korea had backed off its threat and would attend the Games' closing show.
"Fighting for their position in front of the Court of Arbitration for Sport is one thing, but in the Olympic spirit, being there participating in the closing ceremony, of course, is another thing," Carrard said.
So much for the good news.
Although the figure skating competition ended with the women's competition on Thursday, another protest was filed Friday.
The Lithuanian Skating Federation, rebuffed by the ISU when it protested the judging of the free dance portion of the ice dance competition, took its appeal to the ISU's executive council.
Lithuania contends its fifth-place duo of Margarita Drobiazko and Povilas Vanagas would have finished higher if the judges had properly penalized the higher-ranking Canadian and Italian couples for falls.
Barbara Fusar-Poli and Maurizio Margaglio of Italy won the bronze and Shae-Lynn Bourne and Victor Kraatz of Canada finished fourth.
"It was patently unfair," John Domanskis, the Lithuanian National Olympic Committee's attache, said of the judging.
"It's pretty unusual that a small country can get anywhere with a protest .
It's like a closed shop.
But it becomes more and more obvious something is going on....
The further we can take it, we're going to try, so we can make a statement and see what we can do for our athletes in the future."
The ISU put off until April a decision on the fate of suspended French judge Marie Reine Le Gougne, who was at the center of the pairs controversy.
Le Gougne and Didier Gailhaguet, head of the French figure skating federation, were questioned this week about allegations she had been pressured by Gailhaguet to vote for the Russian pair over the Canadians, an approach she did not report to the ISU until after she judged the competition and gave an advantage in the long program to the Russians.
Her scores gave them the gold on a 5-4 vote, although Sale and Pelletier later got duplicate gold medals.
Le Gougne has told conflicting stories, saying she was pressured by Gailhaguet and then retracting that claim.
Soccer:
Team goes through the motions in final World Cup qualifying game.
The United States soccer team closed out its two-year, 16-game World Cup qualifying campaign on a timid note Sunday, doing little more than going through the motions as it played to a 0-0 tie against Trinidad and Tobago.
The game at sparsely occupied Hasely Crawford Stadium in Port of Spain, Trinidad, was widely viewed as meaningless, because the U.S. has already qualified for Korea/Japan 2002 while Trinidad and Tobago had long been out of contention for a place in the quadrennial world championship.
But there was something at stake.
To begin with, a U.S. victory would have left it in second place behind Costa Rica in the final North and Central American and Caribbean (CONCACAF) standings.
Instead, Mexico finished second after its 3-0 demolition of Honduras.
The final standings will not mean anything when the draw is held in South Korea on Dec. 1 to divide the 32 World Cup participants into eight groups of four for first-round play, but finishing third does mean that the U.S. will be viewed as no better than the third-best team in its own region in the eyes of the rest of the soccer world.
Also, this was a game in which the American players were supposed to have begun seriously battling for a place on the 23-man roster that Coach Bruce Arena will take to the May 31-June 30 World Cup in Japan and South Korea.
Judging by Sunday's performance, only goalkeeper Zach Thornton enhanced his chances, while forward/midfielder Jovan Kirovski did considerable damage to his.Thornton, who will probably be trying to claim the No. 3 goalkeeping position behind Brad Friedel and Kasey Keller, made at least two excellent saves in the second half as Trinidad and Tobago sought only its second victory of the final qualifying round.
First, the Chicago Fire keeper, who had the lowest goals-against average in Major League Soccer in the recently concluded season, dived to his right to snare a curving shot from Stern John.
Later, he rushed alertly out of his net to make a sliding block on Nigel Pierre's shot.
Kirovski, meanwhile, squandered the best U.S. scoring opportunity by heading a Greg Vanney cross wide left in the first half.
He also missed badly on other shots--a mirror of U.S. efforts all day--was ineffective on defense and twice was caught offside.
Arena said the 90-degree temperature made conditions difficult and that he considered the result a fair one, but his frustration at poor U.S. finishing and inconsistent defending was evident on the sideline while the tedious affair was in progress.
In its 16 qualifying games (six were played in the first round)
the U.S. finished with an 8-4-4 record.
The American Red Cross has a 10-day supply of blood on hand because of the rush of donations after the Sept. 11 attacks.
But it also has thrown out some blood because it couldn't be frozen in time, officials said Sunday.
The organization that supplies about half of America's blood, which previously had only a 1-3 day supply, has both built up the inventory of liquid blood to 10 days, and also frozen about a half-day supply.
It hopes to freeze more, to ensure adequate blood in case of national emergencies, senior vice president Bill Blaul said Sunday.
"There's too much uncertainty, too many warnings from the government ... we don't ever want to be caught with not enough blood," Blaul said.
"To go on with a 1- to 3-day inventory is playing a risky game."
Some blood experts have criticized the Red Cross for encouraging more donations than needed to treat the relatively few survivors in New York, after the Sept. 11 attacks.
They have raised repeated concerns that the Red Cross would be forced to discard blood before it could be used.
Of the blood collected, the organization has destroyed less than 10 percent of the platelets and red cells and none of the plasma, Blaul said.
But some of the Red Cross' local blood-bank directors disputed that, saying more than 10 percent was destroyed, The Washington Post reported in Sunday's editions.
Several directors told the Post that even more blood was reaching the end of its shelf life and would soon be destroyed.
The Red Cross had to destroy the blood because the organization did not have the resources to freeze it before its shelf life of 42 days had passed, Blaul said.
Freezing blood takes both medical expertise and adequate storage space.
Several blood-bank directors said they had, after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, encouraged the Red Cross to not actively seek donations until it had a plan in place to freeze the excess, the Post reported.
Blaul said the Red Cross felt it would have been criticized if it had not stockpiled more blood, at a time when more terror attacks are possible.
It continued to actively solicit and receive donations.
Since Sept. 11, the Red Cross has received about 1.4 million pints of donated blood.
A person usually donates one pint per donation visit.
It has frozen more than 10,000 pints of red cells, or about a half-day supply, Blaul said.
With enough trained people, it has the capacity to freeze up to 100,000 pints, or a 4-5 day supply, and is hoping to build up to that.
The Red Cross has been hit with a series of controversies over its handling of disaster relief the attacks.
Its director, Bernadine Healy, resigned because of differences with the board, including a controversy over whether to keep money raised specifically for victims of the Sept. 11 attacks separate from the organization's main relief fund.
The 37,000-employee American Red Cross provides almost half the nation's blood supply.
Local, independent blood agencies collect the other half.
Threat:
Terrorists also want chemical and germ weapons, president warns as he tries to rally support from abroad.
President Bush said Tuesday that Osama bin Laden and his Al Qaeda terrorist network are trying to obtain nuclear, biological and chemical weapons, and he urged other nations to adopt the war on terrorism as their own.
"This is an evil man that we're dealing with.
And I wouldn't put it past him to develop evil weapons to try to harm civilization as we know it," Bush said.
As U.S. bombers attack Afghanistan in an effort to dislodge Al Qaeda and the Taliban regime, Bush administration officials are increasingly concerned that in some quarters overseas, the war is seen as solely an American affair.
Offering a preview of a speech he will give Saturday to the U.N. General Assembly, Bush pressed for specific contributions for the anti-terrorism effort.
"I will put every nation on notice that these duties involve more than sympathy or words," he said.
"No nation can be neutral in this conflict, because no civilized nation can be secure in a world threatened by terror."
He said the United States is "at the beginning of our efforts in Afghanistan.
And Afghanistan is the beginning of our efforts in the world."
By citing weapons of mass destruction, Bush emphasized the potential reach of terrorist organizations, demonstrating that other countries could also be at risk in what they may see as a fight with little meaning beyond the United States and Afghanistan.
Although administration officials have feared that the terrorist network is seeking weapons of mass destruction, Bush had not previously raised such a concern in public.
Bush presented it first in an address carried by satellite to an audience of Central and Eastern European leaders in Warsaw, the Polish capital, and then in answering reporters' questions with French President Jacques Chirac at his side in the White House Rose Garden.
Asserting that Al Qaeda cells operate in more than 60 nations, Bush said that "they are seeking chemical, biological and nuclear weapons."
"Given the means, our enemies would be a threat to every nation and, eventually, to civilization itself," the president told the European leaders.
"We will not wait for the authors of mass murder to gain the weapons of mass destruction.
We act now because we must lift this dark threat from our age and save generations to come."
The president's message about the potential reach of the terrorists contrasted with administration reports that the bombing campaign over Afghanistan is weakening the Taliban and thus the Al Qaeda network.
But it echoed warnings from international authorities and Bush aides about the direction the terrorists might consider taking.
And statements by Bin Laden in recent years have encouraged such fears.
In one, an interview broadcast on Christmas Eve 1998, he said of chemical and nuclear weapons: "If I seek to acquire such weapons, this is a religious duty.
How we use them is up to us."
Referring to such comments, Bush said, "We need to take him seriously."
The audience Bush addressed by videoconference brought together 14 presidents and prime ministers and other leaders from 17 countries that were largely part of the Soviet orbit until a decade ago.
"Like the fascists and totalitarians before them, these terrorists--Al Qaeda, the Taliban regime that supports them and other terror groups across our world--try to impose their radical views through threats and violence.
We see the same intolerance of dissent; the same mad, global ambitions; the same brutal determination to control every life and all of life."
Bin Laden's interest in obtaining nuclear, biological or chemical weapons has worried U.S. counter-terrorism authorities for years, a Bush administration official said.
Multiple reports, all unproved, suggest that his efforts to acquire nuclear weapons or material have been unrelenting.
"It has become clear that these guys have been very interested in acquiring these kinds of capabilities," said the official, who asked not to be identified.
"Whether they have or not is not clear."
In a federal court earlier this year, a former Bin Laden aide testified that he had tried to obtain weapon-grade uranium offered by a former Sudanese government minister.
He paid $1.5 million for a "heavy, shielded cylinder" purportedly containing enriched uranium and received a $10,000 cash bonus from Al Qaeda, he testified.
But he said he didn't know whether the cylinder actually contained uranium--or whether it eventually made it to Al Qaeda.
In recent weeks, Russian media have reported that Bin Laden has bought several suitcase-size nuclear bombs from Russia that have not been used only because they are protected by Soviet codes requiring a signal from Moscow before they can be detonated.
The International Atomic Energy Agency warned last week that the Sept. 11 hijackings that killed approximately 4,600 people signaled that terrorists may be increasingly willing to reach for a nuclear attack--either by detonating a nuclear bomb, attacking a nuclear power plant or building some sort of radioactive explosive.
"The willingness of terrorists to commit suicide to achieve their evil aims makes the nuclear terrorism threat far more likely than it was before Sept. 11," Mohammed Baradei, director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, said in a statement.
The Vienna-based agency, which sets standards for nuclear safety and security, has recorded 175 cases of trafficking in nuclear materials since 1993.
It has recorded 18 cases involving small amounts of highly enriched uranium or plutonium, the material needed to make a nuclear bomb.
But agency experts say the quantities were insufficient to make a bomb.
Short of making a nuclear bomb, agency experts say, terrorists could attach radioactive waste to a conventional bomb, spreading the waste.
This radioactive material could come from the food preservation industry or medical waste.
Procedures used to check for welding errors or cracks in buildings and pipelines could also yield such waste.
The White House said the president was invited to address the Eastern and Central European gathering by the summit's organizer, Polish President Aleksander Kwasniewski.
The speech fit neatly into the administration's effort to reach out not only to other leaders but also to opinion makers and moderate Arab nations at a time when support for the U.S. position appears to be eroding in Muslim countries and Europe.
Summit participants watched Bush on a large screen in an ornate marble-columned hall at the presidential palace in Warsaw.
They unanimously condemned the Sept. 11 attacks and supported the U.S. response.
Ukrainian President Leonid D. Kuchma compared the threat of global terrorism to "a threat to the planet Earth from outer space.
"
"That is why the whole of mankind should defeat it," he said.
The participants were Albania, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Macedonia, Moldova, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Ukraine and Yugoslavia.
Russia, Belarus, Turkey, the United States and various international organizations sent observers.
While focused on anti-terrorism efforts, the conference also encouraged the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to accept new members from the region.
Speakers for several countries used the meeting to criticize what they described as domestic terrorism, in clear reference to armed insurgencies by Kurdish rebels in Turkey and ethnic Albanians in Yugoslavia and Macedonia.
Macedonian President Boris Trajkovski said that after his country's adoption of planned political reforms guaranteeing greater rights for ethnic Albanians, any further actions by ethnic Albanian guerrillas will be treated as terrorism.
Turkey's justice minister, Hikmet Sami Turk, linked the anti-terrorism campaign to his country's long fight against Kurdish separatists.
"As a country which has suffered severely from terrorist acts for many decades and lost more than 30,000 innocent lives at the hand of terrorism, Turkey shares the feelings of the American people wholeheartedly," Turk said.
"There should not be any room for double standards, whereby some acts of terror are condemned while others are justified on the basis of different criteria," he added.
"Unfortunately, there is a tendency in recent years . . . to accuse the states which are confronted with terrorism of human rights violations."
The president of Albania, however, warned that the fight against terrorism must not be allowed to become an excuse for violating the human rights of ethnic minorities.
The conference participants agreed that as a coalition they should "bring to account all those responsible for terrorist attacks" and target terrorist organizations' financial, communications and logistics networks and support.
They also said the "swift enlargement" of the European Union and NATO would make the counter-terrorism campaign "more efficient."
"May no terrorist feel safe in Central Europe," Kwasniewski declared at a closing news conference.
"We will combat them by any means available to us."
Gerstenzang reported from Washington and Holley from Warsaw.
Times staff writers Josh Meyer and Aaron Zitner in Washington contributed to this report.
Health:
Controversial Italian fertility specialist refuses to confirm reports of a woman's pregnancy.
Some doctors express outrage.
Scientists reacted with skepticism and shock on Saturday to a report that a woman taking part in a controversial human cloning program for infertile couples was eight weeks pregnant.
Italian fertility specialist Severino Antinori, who last year announced his intention to create the world's first human clone, has been quoted as saying one woman in his program is pregnant--but he has since refused to confirm or deny it.
"Our project is at a very advanced stage.
One woman among the thousands of infertile couples in the program is eight weeks pregnant," Gulf News, an English-language newspaper in the United Arab Emirates, on Wednesday reported Antinori as saying.
It said Antinori, who did not give any further details, had been responding to a question at a lecture at the Zayed Center for Follow-up and Coordination, an Abu Dhabi think tank.
It was unclear if Antinori had clearly stated that the woman's pregnancy was a result of cloning.
Contacted by telephone Saturday, Antinori said, "I am not talking to journalists," before hanging up.
There was no information as to where the woman was, or from whom the alleged fetus was cloned, if it was.
Cloning and fertility experts expressed strong doubts about the report.
Dr. Ehab Kelada, clinical director at the London Fertility Center, said Antinori must clarify the report immediately.
"The scientific community will be very alarmed," he said.
"If this report is true, it is shocking.
We don't know how safe cloning is for humans, and it is dangerous to embark on this path without proper regulations or guidelines," he said.
Rudolf Jaenisch, professor of biology and a leading cloning scientist based at the Whitehead Institute and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, said he was extremely angry at the news but very skeptical.
He said the scientific community would have no way of verifying whether the baby, if it existed, was a clone.
"I do not trust these people to tell us the truth," he said.
"It is totally outrageous and irresponsible to attempt cloning of humans when we know there is a very high probability of severe abnormalities, even if the baby survived to birth, which is extremely doubtful.
In fact, death before birth would be the best outcome."
Antinori has been working with Panos Zavos, a former professor at the University of Kentucky in the United States, to clone fetuses for infertile couples.
The day the first case of anthrax was revealed, Tommy G. Thompson stood behind a White House lectern and announced that the dying Florida man had swallowed water from a stream, implying the incident was the work of nature rather than terrorists. 
A little more than two weeks later, the number of anthrax exposures has spiraled to at least 43 people in four cities, escalating the nation's fear that the contamination is out of control and raising concerns that the government's top health official is out of his depth. 
The turn of events proved a rocky start to the crisis for Thompson, a former Wisconsin governor and a career politician who came to his Cabinet post with virtually no medical or scientific expertise.
His early missteps--he has also been criticized for asserting that the government was prepared to handle "any kind of bioterrorism attack"--caused some to wonder if Thompson was the best choice for explaining one of the most frightening public health crises in memory. 
He was selected as secretary of Health and Human Services for his work on welfare reform, having made Wisconsin the first state to move massive numbers of recipients off the rolls.
But almost overnight, the tragedies of Sept. 11 transformed him into the Bush administration's point man on anthrax, a subject he knew little about even a month ago. 
"He's a politician trying to handle a public health crisis, and the nation doesn't trust politicians," said a former high-ranking Clinton administration health official. 
His aides contend that he has performed his job well during the anthrax scare. 
Though Thompson's message has at times sounded confused, he is typical of official Washington as it scrambles to explain the source of the bioterrorism and its potential reach.
This week, the House shut down while the Senate stayed on.
The Justice Department is seeking to determine whether this is the work of terrorists abroad or some deranged chemist at home.
And the Bush administration has sounded a well-meaning but schizophrenic call for both normality and vigilance. 
If anything, Thompson may have been too eager to reassure the country at the expense of credibility, some critics say.
The fact that the Florida man had inhalation anthrax, an extremely rare form of the disease that had not been seen in this country for 25 years, should have set off alarms that Thompson either did not recognize or failed to convey, they say.
And many bioterrorism experts dispute Thompson's assertion that the nation is prepared for any attack. 
But the no-nonsense demeanor that helped make Thompson the nation's longest-serving governor may not, by itself, satisfy a nation full of questions about bioterrorism.
And some health experts believe he should have shared the podium early on with physicians better qualified to explain the science. 
"The most important thing for the secretary, any secretary, to remember: They are political appointees," said Donna E. Shalala, who served for eight years as Health and Human Services secretary during the Clinton administration and is now president of the University of Miami. 
"They have three great scientific organizations that the public trusts, and they ought to put people from those institutions out front to educate the public and to reassure the public," she said, referring to the brain trust at Thompson's disposal--the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Food and Drug Administration and the National Institutes of Health. 
Still, Thompson's ability to relate to common folks has served him well.
Even his detractors say he has done a good job of assuring people that a government response is in place, reiterating like a mantra that anthrax is not contagious and that there are enough antibiotics to treat 2 million people for 60 days. 
"He's started doing a better job of saying this is where we are, this is where we're short," said Chris Jennings, a former health advisor to President Clinton.
"The lesson we all need to learn from this is the public is not stupid . . . and the most important thing right now is honesty and credibility." 
Thompson's aides dispute that he was anything but honest in acknowledging the nation must be ready for a more widespread attack.
"From the get-go, Secretary Thompson said we are prepared to respond and we have--quickly, aggressively and effectively--but we need to do more," said his spokesman, Tony Jewell.
"And that's the part of the message that always gets left off." 
Moreover, Thompson has not kept scientists from the podium, Jewell said, explaining that the department's best minds were busy in the early days responding to the unfolding crisis: "He seeks out the most qualified people in any given field and encourages them to do their job." 
Even if Thompson had been more inclined to turn to experts in the early days, there were few on hand.
Two of the three agencies he oversees--the National Institutes of Health and the FDA--have not had a permanent director appointed, the mark of the notoriously slow Washington bureaucracy that Thompson has soundly criticized. 
"The problem he is facing is he has no backup in the department right now," said Paul Light, who studies government at the Brookings Institution, a nonpartisan Washington think tank.
He noted that in addition to the two vacancies, the sitting surgeon general, David Satcher, is a Clinton appointee held in relatively low regard by the Bush White House. 
"Thompson is doubly exposed," Light said.
"He is not a scientist.
He does not know these issues well and he can be forgiven for the fact that he doesn't have the troika of aides behind him.
Those are arguably the worst of circumstances for him." 
It was only midweek that Satcher and CDC Director Jeffrey Koplan began to assume a higher public profile. 
Their early obscurity may have been less Thompson's burden than his choice, the mark of a former governor accustomed to taking charge.
Indeed, before Sept. 11, there were signs that the former chief executive was bridling under the subordinate role he is required to play as a member of the Bush Cabinet. 
But when anthrax surfaced, Thompson took the reins, turning the conference room across from his office into a command center that operates around the clock.
His staff wakes him up with every late-night development.
His office gets 200 media calls a day.
His face has been ubiquitous on network television--his day Wednesday began at 6 a.m. with the first of seven talk show appearances. 
But keeping the American people informed about a health crisis is hardly Thompson's only task.
He has won praise from some observers for seizing the opportunity to secure resources to prepare for future bioterrorism.
On Wednesday he asked for $1.5 billion for bioterrorism preparedness, took steps to increase the supply of drugs to counter anthrax and negotiated with drug companies for enough smallpox vaccine for every American. 
"His main job is getting the money and he's been artful and all over that," said Drew Altman, president of the nonpartisan Kaiser Family Foundation in Menlo Park, Calif. 
Even critics who have long disagreed with Thompson on policy say he has seemed more sure-footed in recent days, yielding the stage to science and preparing for more widespread attacks without exacerbating tensions. 
At the end of a long day on Wednesday, during an interview with ABC's "Nightline," the harried Thompson even found a place for rueful humor: "Sometimes I wonder why I left the state of Wisconsin."
More U.S. special forces entered Afghanistan to support anti-Taliban rebels as top commanders said Sunday the Taliban government is weakening but still controls substantial troops that will take time to thin out and conquer.
"We're setting in for the long haul," said Air Force Gen. Richard Myers, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
"We are going to continue to resupply" the anti-Taliban fighters of the opposition northern alliance "right through the winter," Myers said.
"We think that they have every chance of prevailing."
The general said a couple more teams of special forces were inserted in Afghanistan the last few days.
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said last week he hoped to at least triple the number of special forces inside Afghanistan, now believed to number between 100 and 200.
The teams are working with opposition leaders and "the more teams we get on the ground, the more effectively we'll bring air power to bear on the Taliban lines," Myers said on NBC's "Meet the Press."
The teams are likely to include Green Berets, U.S. Army commandos who specialize in advising foreign troops.
Special forces on the ground can also find hidden targets for U.S. airstrikes.
The Pentagon said Sunday that U.S. bombing over the weekend focused on targets close to four key cities near the Taliban front lines with northern alliance rebels: Bagram, Taloqan, Konduz, and Mazar-e-Sharif.
The northern alliance claims to have launched a major offensive near Mazar-e-Sharif.
Capture of that city by anti-Taliban forces would open a major supply route from Uzbekistan and Tajikistan.
U.S. bombs also targeted caves and tunnels suspected as Taliban and al-Qaida hideouts.
In Pakistan, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said that four weeks of U.S. bombing have weakened the Taliban's ability to operate as a government.
The Taliban are "using their power in enclaves throughout the country to impose their will on the Afghan people," but are not making "major military moves," Rumsfeld said.
"The Taliban (are) not really functioning as a government."
Myers said the United States has taken down Taliban air defenses, their transportation for resupplying their troops and their communications.
"They have a substantial force left, but at this point that's exactly what we expected," Myers said.
Myers and Army Gen. Tommy Franks, commander of U.S. forces in the war, declined to say whether it would take a major deployment of U.S. ground troops to topple the Taliban.
Appearing on ABC's "This Week," Franks was asked whether he would rule out the use of a large number of ground forces. "
Absolutely not," he replied.
Franks said the United States would listen to its allies on whether to conduct the war during the Muslim holy month of Ramadan, which begins around Nov. 17, and then make a decision on whether to move ahead.
"I think we'd be awfully foolish to not listen to people who have joined with us in this campaign," Franks said.
President Bush indicated last week the campaign would not ease during Ramadan. "
The enemy won't rest during Ramadan and neither will we," Bush said.
Members of Congress said it is too early to tell how long the war will last or whether more ground troops will be needed.
"I think our enemies, the more they're convinced that we're in this for the long haul, the shorter this thing" may last, said Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz.
, on "Fox News Sunday."
Added Democratic Sen. Joseph Biden, the Foreign Relations Committee chairman: "It may very well be that as things move on," administration officials "have to insert, or at least contemplate, a larger infusion of ground forces."
Joining Biden on CBS' "Face the Nation," Sen. Chuck Hagel, R-Neb., said, "I don't see where you're going to put a half a million men on the ground like we did in Vietnam or any of the large-scale efforts.
"
A Washington spokesman for the northern alliance, Haron Amin, said preparations are under way for a multipronged attack on various fronts in the north of Afghanistan.
Myers said "there's a lot of planning going on right now" concerning possible nuclear and biological threats from terrorists, including threats posed by Iraq's Saddam Hussein.
A helicopter that crashed in bad weather Friday night in Afghanistan while attempting to rescue a sick soldier was identified as an MH-53, probably an Air Force "Pave Low" special forces troop carrier.
Four crew members aboard the downed craft were injured, none critically, but were taken out by a second helicopter on the mission.
F-14 Tomcats from the USS Theodore Roosevelt destroyed the downed helicopter to prevent its wreckage from falling into enemy hands.
On Saturday, two more helicopters returned to rescue the ill special forces operative and succeeded in flying him out.
Franks and Myers took issue with a report in The New Yorker that 12 members of the Army's super-secret Delta Force special operations unit were injured -- three seriously -- in a raid Oct. 20 of a house used by Taliban leader Mullah Mohammed Omar.
The magazine said 100 soldiers in the raid faced more resistance from Taliban forces than expected and had to fight their way to safety, according to the magazine.
Myers said that while "the Taliban probably did return fire" that overall, "there was no resistance.
The Taliban were in complete disarray.
"
"We had a bunch of these young people who had scratches and bumps and knocks from rocks ...
so it's probably accurate to say that maybe five or maybe 25 people were wounded,"' Franks said.
"We had no one wounded by enemy fire
and I think that is probably worthwhile noting.
" 
Copyright 2001 Associated Press
American Muslims observed Ramadan at mosques across the nation Saturday as U.S. bombs continued to fall on Afghanistan.
Some said they hoped for a quick end to the bloodshed and suffering -- even if it meant battle during the most important holy days.
"I would like to see this over and done with as quickly as possible," said Nazila Adeli, a native of Iran, as she worked behind the counter of her family's bakery in Los Angeles.
"Hopefully the war will be over before Ramadan ends."
Others said they would pray for fellow Muslims half a world away.
"As Muslims we consider ourselves one body of people," said Suhail Mulla, 29, before prayers at the Islamic Center of Reseda in Los Angeles.
"When Muslims in one part of the world are suffering we also feel their pain."
Mahmoud Abdel-Baset, coordinator of religious and social services at the Islamic Center of Southern California, feared the Taliban would use the continued bombing as a propaganda weapon against the United States.
He believes U.S. officials should step up food drops and other humanitarian efforts in honor of Ramadan.
"The war is not simply military," he said.
"It's a war of propaganda on both sides."
Ramadan, a monthlong holiday of fasting and purification, celebrates God's revealing of the Quran, Islam's holy book, to the prophet Mohammed.
During Ramadan, Muslims are forbidden to eat, drink, smoke, or have sexual intercourse during daylight hours.
But the "iftar," the evening meal that breaks the fast, is a time of celebration and joy.
The holiday began around the world on Friday and Saturday, depending on the sighting of the new moon.
In Dearborn, Mich., hundreds streamed into the American Moslem Society mosque for midday prayers on Saturday.
Daifalla Asoufy said Ramadan is a special time to "leave everything to Allah."
"There is nothing we can do, really, about what is going on to the Islam," said Asoufy, president of the Yemini American Association.
"Except it's affecting us emotionally."
With the call to prayer being announced, Fawzi Bazzi said he would remember the victims of Sept. 11.
"They should continue to hit them until they get to Osama bin Laden," Bazzi said.
"He hurt everybody.
I don't think he's a Muslim."
Abdulwahab Mohmed of Detroit said he hopes "they will stop (the bombing) during Ramadan because some innocent people might get killed."
After the sun set Friday over Manhattan, almost two dozen Afghan Muslims gathered in a Queens mosque to break the first fast of Ramadan.
The Masjid Hazrat-I-Abubaker Sadiq mosque is spiritual home to about a quarter of New York's estimated 20,000 Afghan immigrants.
The menu was spicy lamb over rice, eggplant in yogurt sauce and green tea.
The talk focused on the Taliban's recent defeats, and the growing hopes for a united Afghanistan.
"Here we are all together," said Shershah Ayoub, a project manager for a building maintenance company.
"Over here there is no difference between Pashtun, Uzbek, Tajik," ethnic groups in Afghanistan.
Ayoub, a Pashtun, fought with the mujahedeen against the Soviets when he was a teen-ager.
He rolled up a gray-striped shirt sleeve to reveal a forearm raked with scars.
"Our country is getting slowly, hopefully back to normal," he said.
Deals: Advisor to major investors endorses proposed acquisition of Compaq over Walter Hewlett's dissident plan.
Hewlett-Packard Co. on Tuesday scored the biggest victory so far in its hard-fought campaign to take over Compaq Computer Corp., winning the endorsement of an influential advisor to big investors.
Institutional Shareholder Services said the $22-billion merger was a better bet than a plan by dissident HP director Walter Hewlett for the company to go it alone and reinvest in its profitable printing business.
"We believe that the Compaq merger provides a better means of maximizing long-term value by exploiting the potential of all of HP's assets, rather than just a single crown jewel," ISS said.
With about 20% of HP shares committed to opposing the deal and a much smaller number publicly in favor, opposition by ISS could have left the merger's prospects all but dead.
Now, HP's management may have a slight edge ahead of a March 19 vote.
"It's going to be very close.
We're going to be down to examining the chads," said J.P. Morgan analyst Daniel Kunstler.
He said he expected ISS to endorse the merger, but was surprised how unequivocal the endorsement was.
Hewlett and David Packard, both sons of the iconic Silicon Valley company's founders, have led fierce opposition to the combination.
They say that HP, which is losing money in the computer business, shouldn't tie itself to a rival even more deeply involved in personal computers.
contends that adding Compaq will give it a dominant position in multiple markets, vastly increase HP's small services arm and allow it to compete better in the big-computer arena against IBM Corp. and Sun Microsystems Inc.
analysts met repeatedly with Hewlett, HP Chief Executive Carly Fiorina and others involved in the costly and contentious proxy fight during the last few months.
About 23% of HP shares are held by ISS clients, some of whom automatically follow the firm's recommendations.
Of the HP investors that are ISS clients, Barclays Bank is the largest, with more than 3% of shares.
Barclays had committed to voting as ISS recommended because its CEO sits on the HP board and recused herself from voting on the issue.
About 10% of HP shares are estimated to be in the hands of index funds, which typically follow ISS' lead.
The remainder will weigh Tuesday's report but could come to different conclusions.
Compaq shares fell 7 cents to $10.58 on the New York Stock Exchange in regular trading, then rose to $11.20 in after-hours trading after the ISS news.
HP shares rose 5 cents to $20.60 in regular NYSE trading and fell to $20.12 after hours.
In the report, ISS said HP's projected cost savings of $2.5 billion a year were achievable.
And it picked the company's projection of a 4.9% loss in sales over Hewlett's estimate of triple that amount.
"ISS concludes that management offers a reasonable prediction about what the future may hold," the report said.
said it was satisfied that HP's work had been thorough and that the company's board had been actively involved in weighing the Compaq plan and alternatives.
The deciding factor for ISS may have been the amount of effort HP and Compaq already have invested in planning the implementation of the merger.
More than a half-million hours have been spent by managers plotting the integration of products and employee teams, making HP-Compaq "one of the most exhaustively planned combinations ever," ISS said.
"We're pleased that ISS, who is a truly independent expert, recognizes that this merger serves the best interests of our shareholders," Fiorina said.
"We think this is a significant vote of confidence."
Hewlett said he disagreed with the ISS decision and observed that the Maryland firm is better known for its handling of corporate governance issues.
"ISS clearly has a predisposition to support management and makes a general presumption that boards do the right thing," Hewlett said.
took both sides to task for some of the high-pitched and personalized rhetoric of the last few weeks in mailings to shareholders, news releases and full-page ads.
In one recent spat, Hewlett released board committee meeting minutes and a letter from HP's counsel to Compaq's, showing that the companies had contemplated giving Fiorina options valued at more than $50 million.
The agreement wasn't finalized, but ISS agreed with Hewlett that it should have been disclosed.
bears the brunt of the blame for the nastiness, ISS said.
And Hewlett's arguments about the inherent risks of technology mergers and the difficulty of competing in markets for PCs and low-end computer servers probably forced HP to do such diligent work on planning the merger's details.
"Many boardrooms across the country could benefit from the kind of sincere, courageous independence that Mr. Hewlett has displayed," the analysts wrote.
Be that as it may, with the contest in a dead heat and only two weeks to go, few expect the tone of the debate to grow more refined.
"I'd be surprised," said Merrill Lynch analyst Steve Milunovich.
"In political campaigns, the bickering tends to get dirtier the closer you get to the end."
Media:
Al Jazeera reaches 35 million viewers with its news broadcasts, as intelligence and propaganda become crucial weapons in a new kind of conflict.
Hamad ibn Thamer al Thani is under attack.
The White House has accused him of potentially spreading terrorism.
Many Islamic leaders won't talk to him.
His boss has received more than 400 complaints. 
But the satellite television network he runs, Al Jazeera, has an audience estimated at 35 million and growing.
ABC visited this week, hoping to forge a relationship.
And Hamad is making more than $250,000 each time he sells a three-minute Osama bin Laden clip. 
This is a front line of the war against terrorism.
In the Arab world, information has become a valued weapon. 
"All these accusations are proof that we are trying to be professionals and do our job the best way we can," Hamad said at a news conference Thursday at which he defiantly dismissed U.S. demands to tone down Al Jazeera's coverage, including statements by Bin Laden's Al Qaeda terrorist network.
"If we have faults, we try to correct them." 
Al Jazeera is only one battlefield in this newest of conflicts: the information war. 
From propaganda to media broadcasts to covert intelligence, information is playing a more important role in this war than in any other conflict in recent history, according to diplomats, analysts and military experts. 
In part, that's because of the nature of the conflict.
The U.S. is fighting highly mobile, highly secretive networks not found on the pages of an atlas.
At the same time, it must hold together a fragile coalition composed of historical enemies, competing factions and angry constituencies. 
But the importance of information in this war is more than simply finding Bin Laden's hide-out.
In the long run, America's crucial battle is to shape public opinion at home and abroad during an extended conflict. 
How, for instance, do you define victory?
How do you convince the public when you've won a war that has no obvious goal, such as the capture of a capital?
And how do you persuade it to continue fighting? 
In that way, the war on terrorism resembles the Cold War, a 45-year ideological struggle in which both the West and the Soviet Union fought to get out a political message. 
But unlike in the Cold War, the streams of information now are nearly unlimited; the Internet, cellular phones and satellite dishes weren't widespread a decade ago.
Both the U.S. and Arab governments have long since lost the ability to control images and sound bites. 
"In every war, information is extremely important.
But this time, it's even more important," said Anthony Pratkanis, a professor at UC Santa Cruz who has written a book on persuasion techniques.
"We have built the coalition with the various nations.
Now we need to build coalitions with the nations' people.
There's a need for democracy building." 
Or, as one U.S. official familiar with the region put it: "This is a battle for public opinion.
We're doing everything we can to win that battle." 
Perhaps no incident better illustrates the behind-the-scenes fight to control information than Washington's battle with Al Jazeera. 
The network's programming emanates from a small blue and white building sitting on the barren, blindingly white moonscape of Doha, the capital of Qatar, one of the smallest of the Persian Gulf States. 
When Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak saw the building recently, he snorted, saying, "You mean to tell me that all this trouble comes from this matchbox?" 
His choice of words was apt, because Al Jazeera has sparked a blaze of controversy. 
On the air since 1996, it provided Muslims their first glimpse of the daily thump and grind of Arab life--warts and all.
The station was the first to offer extended debates over typically taboo topics such as polygamy and women's rights.
It was the first to feature interviews with top Jewish leaders. 
The pieces angered Arab leaders, who were accustomed to tight control over state media.
Egypt was so angry at one broadcast, it expelled a newscaster's brother. 
But more than anything, Al Jazeera gained fame for its graphic and frequent depictions of the intifada, the year-old clash between Palestinians and Israelis that has galvanized the world's 1.2 billion Muslims. 
"It's an amazing channel," said Khalid ibn Jaber al Thani, a member of the ruling family.
"You get to know what you want to know." 
But that, according to U.S. officials, is too much, especially now, in the middle of a war.
During a recent state visit, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell asked Sheik Hamad ibn Khalifa al Thani, Qatar's emir and Al Jazeera's owner, to "tone down" the coverage. 
The language grew stronger late this week, when National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice told U.S. network executives that Bin Laden might be using Al Jazeera to transmit coded messages to terrorist cells. 
The confrontation grew out of Al Jazeera's special relationship with Bin Laden.
The network conducted an extensive interview with the Saudi militant in 1998, one it broadcast three times in one day shortly after the Sept. 11 attacks, angering U.S. officials. 
Further, as the only television network with an office in Kabul, the Afghan capital--despite the Taliban's ban on television--it has received exclusive footage or messages from Bin Laden three times since the attacks. 
U.S. government officials acknowledge that they're actively trying to alter Al Jazeera's editorial content.
In addition to Powell's conversation with the emir, officials have visited the station itself to express their concerns that it has become a terrorist mouthpiece.
They have also worried about Al Jazeera's objectivity. 
U.S. officials compared their attempts to the actions of an angry public official calling a local media outlet to complain about coverage. 
"I see it as much less a freedom of the press issue than a matter-of-fact battle for public opinion.
This is a legitimate debate.
Is this news, or are you giving a soapbox to terrorism?
" said one U.S. official familiar with the region. 
So far, Al Jazeera has resisted any entreaties to change, although the complaints come at a delicate time.
The network's five-year, $150-million government grant runs out at the end of the month.
That means the network must raise its own money to continue.
Facing a commercial boycott encouraged by Arab leaders in other countries, it has gotten a big funding boost from one of its most lucrative products--the Bin Laden videos. 
Mohammed Jasem al Ali, Al Jazeera's managing director, said he has charged as much as $250,000 for a three-minute clip from the 1998 Bin Laden interview.
He would not say how much he has charged CNN and other media outlets for the right to the most recent clips, although he said it was less than $1 million. 
"We're making good money," he said, smiling. 
So far, the U.S. attempts to influence Al Jazeera have backfired badly.
Several leading Arab commentators have accused the U.S. of a double standard, promoting free press at home while crushing it abroad. 
At the news conference Thursday, Hamad ibn Thamer al Thani, who is chairman of Al Jazeera's board, defiantly vowed to continue programming as usual, despite U.S. claims that more Bin Laden clips could help terrorists. 
"I'm not in a position to determine if there is a message in a videotape," Hamad said.
"Our main target is to do things in a professional manner.
If we have proof, we'd review it at that moment.
But we cannot presuppose" what we would do. 
The battle with Al Jazeera is only one front.
State Department officials also tried to stop the Voice of America, the U.S. government's radio voice, from airing an exclusive interview with Taliban leader Mullah Mohammed Omar. 
Though the interview was eventually aired, the heavy-handed attempts angered the station's news director. 
"During the past few days, there has been a systematic attack on the Voice of America," wrote Andre deNesnera, the news director. 
The U.S. has also stepped up its propaganda campaign, dropping leaflets, food packets and hand-crank radios into Afghanistan.
Moving through Congress is a $14-million plan to create a Radio Free Afghanistan to broadcast the U.S. view into the region. 
Americans are not the only ones engaged in the information battle. 
British Prime Minister Tony Blair has mounted a one-man lobbying campaign, journeying throughout the Middle East, appearing on Al Jazeera and writing letters in Arabic newspapers to convince Muslims that the war on terrorism is just. 
The Arab League recently announced plans to try to mount its own satellite news program in English, to focus on the intifada.
And Palestinians unsuccessfully tried to block reporters from filming Palestinians celebrating on the day of the Sept. 11 attacks. 
"There is one weakness of the mass media, and that is you can't get a proper sense of perspective from a picture on CNN," said Nabil Shaath, a Palestinian Authority minister.
The filming "gave the false feeling that this represents how Palestinians feel.
That angered President Yasser Arafat.
" 
And then, of course, there is Bin Laden himself, who has shown himself to be a master propagandist.
He successfully got on the air the first night of the allied strike, reinforcing his image of invulnerability. 
And he used stirring rhetoric that successfully won over many Muslims, according to media experts. 
"Bin Laden gained a lot of support in the Arab world and with many Muslims," said Mohammed Mussir, a political science professor at Qatar University.
"He is now a hero among many." 
Another issue is the difficulty of getting any message across in an era in which there are so many different outlets.
To win a battle in today's "message-dense" environment, the key requirements are patience, focus and, perhaps most important, old-fashioned democratic persuasion. 
All of those things require a long-term commitment, a foreign policy focus the U.S. has not embraced since the end of the Cold War a decade ago. 
"How do you have a democracy in a world of seven-second sound bites?"
asked Pratkanis, the UC professor.
"That is the task."
Enforcement: Police in Hamburg must deal with restrictions intended to prevent faith-based discrimination like that of the Third Reich.
It's not that authorities failed to notice the spreading tentacles of fundamentalist Islam in this port city with 270,000 foreigners, many of them refugees from religious and ethnic conflicts roiling the world from Afghanistan to the Gaza Strip. 
But with drugs, prostitution and smuggling already branding their city Germany's "Crime Central," Hamburg police were overwhelmed with the everyday mayhem of a seething metropolis.
And under a constitution designed to redress law enforcement's repression of Jews during the Nazi era, police are severely restricted in probing groups defined by faith. 
Until Sept. 11, when the threat of Islamic extremism became a shocking reality, Germany's guardians of public security were almost universally focused on right-wing radicals.
Now, law enforcement in Hamburg and the rest of the country are hamstrung by suddenly shifted priorities, as well as a shortage of resources, as they feverishly probe the terrorist networks. 
That so far there have been no arrests in connection with the attacks in the city where the crimes are believed to have been plotted is withering testimony, authorities concede, to a law enforcement system shaped with an eye on past evils, not those of the present. 
Because the intelligence service is structured on a state level, leads and clues gathered in one state don't get passed on to colleagues in another.
And to prevent abuses of civil rights, as occurred on a mass scale during the Third Reich, the constitution prohibits intelligence agents' access to information about individual searches or interrogations. 
At least two figures in the emerging network of suspects had earlier come to official attention here: Said Bahaji, a German of Moroccan origin accused of aiding the three known suicide hijackers with links to Hamburg, and local businessman Mamoun Darkazanli, who opened a bank account for an alleged associate of Saudi exile Osama bin Laden six years ago. 
Investigators so far have been unable to tie the Syrian-born Darkazanli with the Hamburg terrorist cell, said Manfred Murck, deputy chief of the Hamburg branch of the Office for Protection of the Constitution, Germany's domestic intelligence network.
He said lack of resources and the separation of powers built into Germany's law enforcement system are impeding the investigation. 
"We have found out too late for this tragedy, but it is clear now that the ability to exchange information among agencies in Germany and with international associates is in grave need of improvement," he said. 
Bahaji was under surveillance long before the U.S. attacks because he had been identified as someone with extremist views and contacts.
But agents never detected criminal activity or intent that would have justified closer watch, Murck said. 
"We know the mosques where a lot of radicals meet.
We know the scenes where recruitment might be possible.
But we don't have the resources to be following every possibility on the radical left scene and the radical right and radical Islam all at the same time," he said. 
Intelligence forces were formerly deployed to identify and root out right-wing extremism, but now all resources are being devoted to the Islamic terrorism investigation, said Hans-Juergen Adomeit, chief of analysis for the intelligence service. 
"If an asylum seekers' home is set on fire tomorrow, people will be screaming to know why we weren't watching out for that," Adomeit said.
"And all we'll be able to say is that we were working on the Islamic threat today." 
The Hamburg office has had its personnel reduced from 200 a decade ago to 122 today, and many of the remaining staff are data processors and analysts, not agents capable of street work and precautionary surveillance, Murck said. 
At the federal domestic intelligence agency, staff has been cut from 2,435 in 1990 to 2,085 today. 
"It's difficult enough to conduct surveillance in the Islamic world because of the cultural and religious barriers.
We would need someone with the right languages, and even then it is difficult to get people to talk to us for fear of bringing harm to fellow believers," Murck said. 
Hamburg Police Chief Olaf Scholz agrees that German law enforcement has collectively let its guard down in the decade since East and West Germany were reunited.
For the terrorism probe, federal agents have augmented his forces, but this was managed only because the investigation was immediately deemed likely to cross state borders. 
Even with the loan of 50 extra police officers to retrace the steps of the suspected suicide hijackers, authorities here have largely come up empty-handed, having had too little contact with the Islamic communities before Sept. 11 and now perceived to be on a Muslim witch hunt. 
To tighten security, German law enforcement agencies have begun conducting "screen searches," a residence-by-residence computer scan to identify potential terrorists--that is, those matching a particular profile.
Police have refused to disclose the exact details of the profile, but adherence to the Muslim faith and origins from an Islamic country are known to be among them. 
"You can't talk about Muslims in a homogenous way," warned Horst Tietjens, research director for Hamburg's Office of Foreigners' Affairs.
"Just among the Turks here there are 52 different minorities." 
As a city official charged with enhancing integration of the Muslim communities here, Tietjens has more extensive contacts with and understanding of the cultures than law enforcement.
That familiarity has given rise to some theories about how devout believers can be transformed into fanatics in an environment of tolerance and diversity. 
"These men tend to turn to their religion more here than at home because this is a place where faith is neglected," Tietjens said of Hamburg, renowned for its Reeperbahn red-light district and thriving drug trade.
"They are turned off by the wanton environment and seek reassurance from fellow believers.
If they come into the company of fundamentalists, they get confirmation of this rejection." 
Among the biggest Muslim communities in Hamburg are the 22,000 Afghans, spanning the political spectrum from backers of Mohammed Zahir Shah, the monarch exiled in 1973, to supporters of the harsh Taliban government. 
Earlier this year, the Taliban's health minister, Mohammed Abbas Akhund, visited Hamburg and Frankfurt to collect money for alleged charitable causes, said Ghulam-Sakhi Saheem, an Afghan businessman who fled his homeland 20 years ago, when it was under Soviet occupation. 
Germany's ARD television station claimed Akhund was also on a recruitment drive for Bin Laden, but Afghans here said they were unaware of any involvement or contact with the hijacking suspects. 
"Afghans themselves are not involved in terrorism.
They've been through too much terror in their own country," said Zia Salehi of the Council for Afghans in Northern Germany.
"Afghans who think like the Taliban can't survive here in Europe.
They need to go someplace where they can live in the 15th century."
By Associated Press CHICAGO --
A major security breach at O'Hare International Airport, where a passenger carried knives and a stun gun through a checkpoint, has prompted federal authorities to order background checks for eight private security workers.
"We want to know if they have any criminal convictions and if they are who they say they are," Federal Aviation Administration spokeswoman Elizabeth Isham Cory said Tuesday.
One of the knives reported seized from the passenger was missing, the Chicago Sun-Times said Wednesday.
Saturday's security breach at a United Airlines checkpoint at O'Hare came about two weeks after federal officials ordered new background checks of Argenbright Security Inc. employees at 13 airports nationwide, including O'Hare.
The company was put on probation last year for hiring people with criminal records to staff security checkpoints at Philadelphia International Airport.
It was unclear whether the company had begun the checks at O'Hare before Saturday.
Atlanta-based Argenbright issued a statement Tuesday saying seven of the eight employees had previously undergone fingerprint-based FBI background checks that revealed "no disqualifying crimes preventing their employment."
Convictions in the last 10 years for any of 35 crimes listed by the FAA would be disqualifying, Chicago Department of Aviation spokeswoman Monique Bond said.
The Sun-Times reported Wednesday that two knives seized during the initial screening disappeared, and one still had not turned up.
The newspaper cited unnamed police sources saying Argenbright workers initially denied knowing about the knives, but that one worker turned over a knife on Monday.
United Airlines will not comment about the missing knives, spokeswoman Chris Nardella said.
Argenbright officials did not immediately return phone calls Wednesday.
Local police and federal officials also did not respond to phone calls.
Federal officials said they would provide additional training to Argenbright employees at O'Hare and assign plainclothes inspectors to monitor job performance at the checkpoints.
On Saturday, Subash Gurung, a 27-year-old unemployed Nepalese national in the country on an expired student visa, told Argenbright employees at the United Airlines checkpoint that he was carrying two knives.
The knives were confiscated.
But Gurung was allowed to continue to the gate area with a plastic bag containing seven more knives, a stun gun and a container marked "tear gas-pepper gas.
" Those items were discovered by United workers who searched his luggage at the gate.
Law enforcement officials said Gurung told them he mistakenly packed the knives in a plastic bag rather than his luggage before leaving for the airport.
Gurung was arrested by Chicago police on two misdemeanor charges and released on bond.
He was re-arrested by FBI agents when he returned to O'Hare to retrieve his luggage.
He is scheduled to appear at a preliminary hearing Thursday on a federal felony charge of attempting to board a jetliner carrying weapons.
Federal law enforcement officials said there was no indication Gurung was involved in terrorism, and in a statement the FBI said reports that Gurung shared an address with alleged terrorist suspects were not accurate.
Still, Secretary of Transportation Norman Y. Mineta on Monday called the breach "a case of dramatic dimensions."
United said it was conducting its own investigation to determine how the lapse occurred.
The Chicago Department of Aviation has taken away the security badges of the eight security employees, all of whom have been suspended pending the outcome of an internal Argenbright investigation, Bond said.
Argenbright was fined $1 million after pleading guilty to violations in training, testing and background checks of its employees at Philadelphia International Airport.
Prosecutors said 18 guards it hired had convictions that included drug dealing, kidnapping and theft.
Copyright 2001 Associated Press
Bulgaria's new Socialist president, triumphant after his apparent victory in a difficult election battle, pledged to continue efforts to win the country membership in the European Union and NATO.
Final results from Sunday's runoff election were expected later Monday, but provisional results gave Georgi Parvanov, the leader of the opposition Socialist Party, 53.3 percent of the vote compared to 46.7 percent for incumbent Petar Stoyanov.
Turnout was 54.5 percent, the Central Election Commission said.
In Bulgaria, the presidency is a largely ceremonial position, with real power resting with the prime minister and parliament, but the office still carries considerable moral authority and legislative veto power.
Addressing a news conference, Parvanov pledged to work "for a stronger role of the state" in alleviating economic burdens and to strengthen ties with the rest of Europe.
"I will work for Bulgaria's strategic choice -- Bulgaria's membership in the European Union and NATO," he said.
Parvanov, a 44-year-old historian, surpassed by far the popularity of his party, which garnered only 18 percent of the vote in parliamentary elections in June.
He was also backed by a party representing Bulgaria's 800,000 ethnic Turks, as well as by several Gypsy organizations and retirees' unions.
Parvanov's lead reflected a growing demand for change among Bulgarians disillusioned by a dozen years of economic hardship following the fall of communism.
It also signaled discontent with the pace of reforms implemented by current Prime Minister Simeon Saxcoburggotski, the former king, whose party overwhelmingly won the June elections.
Simeon had urged Bulgarians to vote for Stoyanov, but a number of his party's members disagreed.
The Turks, who are a coalition partner of Simeon, also distanced themselves from his call.
Parvanov rose to the helm of his party in 1996, when mass street protests against economic mismanagement and rampant crime forced it out of power.
Under his leadership, the Socialists set out to reform themselves along the lines of West European Social Democrats.
They also joined the consensus in Bulgaria toward joining NATO.
Parvanov, however, staunchly opposed NATO's air campaign against Yugoslavia in 1999, which Stoyanov supported.
Stoyanov, a 49-year-old lawyer, ran as an independent candidate.
He had also the support of his center-right Union of Democratic Forces.
One aspect of this week's crash of an American Airlines jetliner stands out, aviation experts say: No matter what else went wrong, the tail shouldn't have fallen off.
Neither the turbulence from the jumbo jet that took off just before doomed Flight 587, nor pressure put on the rudder by pilots reacting to the wake, should have been strong enough to break off the tail.
The Airbus A300 plunged into a New York neighborhood Monday, minutes after taking off from Kennedy International Airport.
All 260 people aboard the plane and five on the ground were killed.
"I think there was a pre-existing structural problem with the tail," former National Transportation Safety Board investigator Greg Feith said.
"It was going to fail regardless.
It just so happened the conditions were right."
The Federal Aviation Administration on Friday ordered airlines to immediately inspect the tail assemblies of their Airbus A300-600 and A310 planes.
American and two cargo carriers, FedEx and United Parcel Service, have around 135 of the French-made jets in their fleets.
Investigators say Flight 587 was buffeted by two wakes, generated by the wings of the Japan Air Lines Boeing 747 jet that took off from Kennedy shortly before the American Airlines plane lifted off.
Because of its size and weight, a 747 generates heavy wakes.
"The wake vortex of a 747 should not bring down an aircraft," said Tom Ellis, a spokesman for the Nolan Law Group, a Chicago-based firm that represents victims of airline accidents.
"
The A300 is designed to withstand forces of that nature.
It should be well within its design tolerance.
There's got to be something that interferes with the ability to recover."
The American plane was more than the FAA-required four miles behind the 747.
NTSB spokesman Keith Holloway said the agency was looking at whether to suggest keeping planes farther apart, since wakes dissipate over distance.
Investigators found that the plane's rudders, which help steer the aircraft, moved sharply.
Experts said the movement could have resulted from the pilot hitting the rudder pedals hard or from a jerk on the other end of the cable as the tail snapped off.
But experts said pilots of large planes don't usually use rudders, except when they lose an engine or for help during landings.
Even if the pilots were rough with the rudder, that should not have caused the tail to fall off, said David Stempler, president of the Air Travelers Association, an advocacy group.
"Planes should be designed to withstand even abuse and still be able to maintain structural integrity," Stempler said.
"The pilots may have done something but a plane has to be designed to even withstand harsh treatment by flight crews and not lose major structural elements."
That has led several aviation experts to suggest that there was some unseen weakness in the tail assembly, which was made of carbon-reinforced plastic, a composite material that is lighter than aluminum.
The problems could have dated from 1994, when the American Airlines plane was severely shaken by air turbulence in an episode that injured 47 people, even though the plane was inspected after the incident.
"That's where the investigation really has to start," Feith said.
"It may be the inspection was just a visible inspection.
They're not going to be looking inside that fin area, they're going to be looking for obvious damage.
Something could have happened that, although it didn't immediately fail the tail at that point, did set up a fail scenario."
A procession of large turbaned men with grim visages, thick beards and dusty robes has passed through Hamid Karzai's gate in this southwestern Pakistani city for the last few weeks. 
The visitors identify themselves as tribal leaders and former commanders under the Taliban who have had enough of the mullahs who have ruled their homeland for the last five years.
Since the terrorist attacks on the United States, they have been secretly traveling to Pakistan to help forge a new, broad-based, representative government to replace the regime. 
Karzai is actively recruiting these ethnic Pushtun fighters, seeking their support for the convening of a traditional loya jirga, or grand council, of Afghans under the aegis of 86-year-old Mohammad Zaher Shah, the monarch who was deposed in 1973. 
From the United Nations to Washington, to the ex-king's residence outside Rome and the opposition in northern Afghanistan--and now even in Islamabad, the capital of neighboring Pakistan--a consensus has been forming since Sept. 11 that a loya jirga offers the best chance to resuscitate the failed state, allow it to be rebuilt and bring it back into the international community. 
However, carrying out the plan is proving difficult.
Now that U.S. military action has begun, it is unclear how long the opposition Northern Alliance will agree to postpone an assault on the capital, Kabul, to give time for a broader post-Taliban government to solidify. 
The Taliban resistance already shows signs of crumbling in some places, and Northern Alliance generals now say they want to attack on all fronts within a week or two. 
* Would it be accepted as legitimate by the Afghan people or seen as imposed from the outside? 
* Would it be sufficiently democratic and fairly reflect Afghanistan's tribal, ethnic and sectarian makeup and give at least a voice to the now-silenced female majority? 
* Would the bitter rivalries, ingrained factionalism and foreign interference that have kept Afghans at war with one another since Soviet occupiers were repelled in 1989 melt away? 
* Would a new government be doomed at birth, plunged into a debilitating conflict with the remnants of the Taliban and a generation brought up ignorant of tribal traditions but steeped in Osama bin Laden's brand of militant Islam? 
At Karzai's house, and at similar gatherings in Peshawar, to the northeast, advocates of the loya jirga are recruiting ethnic Pushtun fighters who make up the Taliban's base to ensure that whatever government emerged would be widely seen as legitimate. 
Another key element is Pakistan, which despite its denials gave the Taliban crucial support as the fundamentalists seized control of Afghanistan from 1994 to 1996.
At that time, Pakistan hoped for stability and a friendly regime to its west.
Now, President Pervez Musharraf said Monday, the national interest dictates a change of course. 
Musharraf said Pakistan is seeking a new "dispensation" for Afghanistan.
He spelled out the requirements--that it be democratic, authentic, ethnically balanced and not hostile to Islamabad. 
All the signs are that Pakistan has signed on to the loya jirga plan and will hold talks with representatives of the ex-king, who reigned for 40 years. 
Without agreeing to reveal the names of likely defectors, Karzai, an Afghan deputy foreign minister in the mid-1990s and the former king's man in Quetta, says there is a "clearly sufficient" groundswell of opposition to the Taliban--whose medieval rule, failure to rebuild the Afghan economy and harboring of militants like Bin Laden have alienated many supporters. 
A weekend visit to Karzai's home revealed the host seated on a carpet in a large reception room lined with about 20 august personages from Afghanistan, all talking loya jirga.
In a second room were about 25 more visitors waiting their turn--battle-scarred veterans, most having just come from such cities as Kandahar, Herat and Kabul. 
Perhaps a dozen other visitors milled about the house, where the phones and fax machines were busy too.
Karzai described an operation to spread information about the plan for a loya jirga and to woo potential supporters. 
Most of those in favor of a council argue that it should be convened on Afghan territory in the near future, perhaps as soon as U.S. military attacks or advances by the opposition Northern Alliance create a secure zone cleansed of Taliban soldiers.
Kabul would be ideal, Karzai says, but any city would do.
Karzai does not rule out the idea that some elements of the Taliban could join the deliberations. 
"The ones who have really sided with terrorism cannot be considered for the new arrangements," he said.
"But the majority, the common Taliban, the ordinary Talib with a gun, he is simply an Afghan man." 
In contrast to the rhetoric of Taliban leader Mullah Mohammed Omar and his defenders in Pakistan, visitors to Karzai's home spoke as though support for the regime is steadily vanishing.
Mullach Abdul Mannem, 48, a veteran commander and the regal-looking leader of a village outside Kandahar, said his community of about 5,000 is ready to defect en masse. 
Karzai says a decisive majority of Afghans, given the choice, would favor holding a loya jirga, because the institution has been used to unite tribes and legitimize new rulers for more than 200 years. 
The Northern Alliance, made up mostly of ethnic Tajiks and Uzbeks, has been battling the mainly Pushtun Taliban for years, giving the conflict an ethnic edge.
Now, with the U.S. and much of the world behind them, some alliance members are intoxicated by the possibility that they could recapture Kabul soon. 
But to Pakistan and many Pushtuns, the Northern Alliance alone is unacceptable as a successor to the Taliban on a number of counts: its ties to India, Russia and Iran; its questionable human rights record (including allegations of torture, rape, mass executions and "ethnic cleansing"); and its domination by smaller ethnic minorities rather than Pushtuns, the largest Afghan ethnic group. 
Many experts question whether the alliance could govern. 
"Pushtuns have to be an important part.
Not the dominant part, but part of a government that represents all minorities," a U.S. diplomat said. 
In what could prove a historic agreement, the alliance and the backers of the former king, who is also Pushtun, agreed Oct. 2 to join in forming a broad-based government.
Each side is to nominate representatives to a 120-member Supreme Council for National Unity that would gather in Rome before Nov. 1.
The council would then try to convene the loya jirga, with a mandate to form a two-year provisional government. 
There was an agreement, according to Yusuf Nuristani, a spokesman for the ex-king, that the Northern Alliance forces would not capture Kabul and claim it, but would wait to give the supreme council a chance to form and meet. 
However, an Italian diplomat closely involved in the process warned that the understanding could unravel unless the southern Pushtun opposition gets going soon.
The Italians worry that the U.S. airstrikes weakening the Taliban may spur the Northern Alliance to drive toward Kabul alone. 
The dilemma for the U.S. is how to support the loya jirga idea while keeping its distance.
Everyone agrees that a council instigated by the U.S. would be seen by most Afghans as a puppet gathering.
Although the plan has been quietly encouraged by the administration, President Bush has stated for the record: "We're not into nation-building."
But he suggested Thursday that the United Nations might play a role in setting up a post-Taliban government. 
Zaher Shah's people agree.
"To bring about a future leadership in Afghanistan is the sole responsibility of the Afghan people," said Abdul Sattar Sirat, a royal aide. 
But "how democratic can any appointed council be?
" asked Dr. Sima Samar, an ethnic Hazara from central Afghanistan who now lives in Quetta.
Samar is skeptical that women or Hazaras--Shiite Muslims who trace their ancestry to Genghis Khan's troops--would be accorded their due weight in a traditional council.
She would prefer early democratic elections. 
Another potential stumbling block to a loya jirga is whether President Burhanuddin Rabbani of the Northern Alliance, who led the toppled government still recognized by the most of the world, would angle to stay in power. 
"He has no choice but to resign" if the council chooses someone else, said royal aide Hedayat Amin Arsala. 
The ex-king's role remains ambiguous.
Zaher Shah will turn 87 Sunday, and his age raises questions about how long and how effectively he could serve. 
Supporters counter that Zaher Shah is offering himself only as a symbol to bring together a jirga.
The council would have the responsibility of writing a new constitution and choosing a government. 
The ex-king's grandson, Mostapha Zaher Shah, said last week that he would not minimize the difficulties ahead but that he sees no other way out for the country. 
"It will take the Afghans generations to overcome their differences, but we have to start somewhere," he said.
"If we cannot unite now, when are we going to unite?
"It's a golden opportunity for the Afghan people . . . regardless of ethnicity, regardless of region, regardless of gender, to come together and to save their country from a certain calamity." 
Daniszewski reported from Islamabad and Quetta, Boudreaux from Rome and Tempest from Islamabad.
Times staff writer Robyn Dixon in northern Afghanistan also contributed to this report.
From Associated Press MILAN, Italy --
A small plane with only the pilot on board crashed into the 25th floor of a landmark skyscraper today, killing at least two people and injuring at least 30.
The interior minister said the crash appeared to be an accident.
Some eyewitnesses reported that the plane was on fire before crashing into the 30-story building, Milan Police Office Celerissimo De Simone said.
It was the second time since the Sept. 11 terror attacks that a plane has struck a high-rise building, and today's crash, which occurred near the end of the work day, raised fears of another attack.
"It sounded like a bomb.
The pavement shook like an earthquake," said a woman identifying herself only as Lucia.
The Rockwell Commander aircraft, en route from Switzerland on a 20-minute flight to Milan, punched a hole in the 25th floor of building in downtown Milan.
Smoke poured out of the building, but firefighters quickly put out the flames.
Rescuers helped bloodied men in business suits.
The weather was clear at the time of the crash, which left gaping holes on both sides of the slim skyscraper.
A large section of an entire floor lost its walls, and smoke and liquid poured from the gash in one side of the building.
"The initial information that the Interior Ministry has leads us to lean toward an accident" as the cause, the Italian news agency ANSA quoted Interior Minister Claudio Scajola as saying.
De Simone said the pilot had told Milan's city airport, Linate, the plane's destination, that the plane had landing gear problems.
The pilot had sent out a distress call at 5:54 p.m. just before the crash near Milan's main train station, said police officer Celerissimo De Simone.
"We believe it isn't a terrorist attack," said police Sgt.
Vincenzo Curto, who was reached at the Carabinieri headquarters in Milan. "
The pilot might have taken ill or it was an engine problem."
In Rome, a spokesman for the senate president, Marcello Pera, said the interior minister had informed him that the crash didn't appear to be a terror attack.
Earlier, Pera had said it "very probably" was an attack.
The plane had taken off from Locarno, Switzerland, 50 miles northwest of Milan, and was heading to Milan's Linate airport.
Patrick Herr, spokesman for the Swiss air traffic control office SKYGUIDE, told AP that the plane left Locarno at 5.15 p.m.said two were reported dead and that an unspecified number of people were rescued from elevators blocked in the building.
An office worker who fled told The Associated Press that she saw 10 people injured and bleeding.
She worked on eighth floor, well below where the plane hit the building.
News reports said at least 30 were taken to the hospital.
One Milan hospital, Fatebene Fratelli, said it had received 20 injured, including a woman with burns.
"It was shocking," said Luccheta Antonio, 52, a barber down the block.
"
The windows shook and the mirrors.
"
"It was a violent explosion," said Stefano Bottazzi, 35, works in a skyscraper 500 yards from building.
"The clock fell to the floor."
The scene in Milan mirrored the first moments of the attack on the World Trade Center, with black smoke billowing into the blue sky from the building where the aircraft struck.
On the streets, rescue workers in orange uniforms helped the injured-- including a man with a bloody shirt holding his head.
Ambulances streamed into the area and pedestrians peered upward.
As ambulance crews worked, a man with his shirt splattered with blood and his hand covering a gash on his head, was rushed from the scene.
Police cordoned off the area as people gawked at the skyscraper.
In an interview with Swiss television, the country's consul in Milan, Marco Cameroni, said he believed the pilot was a Swiss citizen who lived in Ticino.
He did not identify the man but said he believed he was the only person on board the aircraft.
National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice and White House chief of staff Andrew Card broke the news to President Bush, White House press secretary Ari Fleischer said.
"I think you can presume that we will be-- if we are not already-- in touch with Italian authorities and will ascertain precisely what the facts are," he said.
personnel were assisting their Italian counterparts in the investigation, an FBI official said on condition of anonymity.
U.S. authorities had no intelligence suggesting any kind of terrorist attack was imminent in Milan, said a U.S. official, also speaking on the condition of anonymity.
Milan was home to an al-Qaida cell that had plotted to attack the U.S. embassy in Rome in early 2001, but the cell was believed to have been broken up by arrests.
The leader, Essid Sami Ben Khemais, was arrested in April 2001.
Khemais also had met with Mohammed Atta, the lead hijacker in the Sept. 11 attacks, before his arrest.
On March 27, the State Department issued a warning for American citizens traveling in four Italian cities, including Milan, during Easter.
The warning said the possible threat was based on information about "extremist groups."
The announcement did not identify the groups or elaborate on the nature of the threats, but it warned that "these groups do not distinguish between official and civilian targets."
A U.S. official said the warning was based on very specific information that was "developed in very close cooperation with Italian authorities."
Italian anti-terrorism officials refused to comment.
It was the second time since the Sept. 11 terror attacks that a plane has struck a high-rise building On Jan. 5, a 15-year-old boy flying alone crashed a stolen plane into a building in Tampa, Fla.
The boy, Charles Bishop, left behind a suicide note saying that al-Qaida terrorists had tried to recruit him, but police said there was no truth to the claim.
Relatives of the boy, who was the only fatality, have filed a lawsuit claiming the acne drug Accutane was behind his suicide.
The Pirelli structure, located near the central train station, is Italy's first skyscraper and one of the world's tallest concrete buildings.
It was built in 1958 and designed by architects Gio Ponti and Pier Luigi Nervi.
The building is one of the main symbols of Milan, along with the city's cathedral.
The skyscraper, built of concrete and glass with a diamond-shaped floor plan, has inspired design around the world including the MetLife building in New York, formally known as the Pan Am building.
U.S. officials have called a mosque and cultural center in Milan "the main al-Qaida station house in Europe."
Since Sept. 11, several individuals have been arrested in Milan as part of a crackdown on suspected Islamic militants.
Italian authorities allegedly uncovered an al-Qaida plot in January, 2001 to attack the U.S. Embassy in Rome and are investigating whether a second plot was in the works earlier this year.
By Lonnie White Mighty Duck goaltender Steve Shields made his second consecutive start against San Jose on Wednesday night at Arrowhead Pond and the good news is that he didn't lose his cool.
But that's only because none of the Sharks tried to get rough with him when he tried to make a save like the Dallas Stars did in his last start.
"I'll probably snap again if that did happen," Shields said before Wednesday's game.
"I put a lot of work into what I do and I prepared myself to play under certain rules.
When I'm not given that chance, I have a problem with that."
What Shields doesn't have a problem with is how Duck Coach Bryan Murray decides which goaltender to start.
Because Shields played well against the Stars in a 2-2 tie, he got the start against San Jose even though Jean-Sebastien Giguere began Wednesday's action fourth in the league with a 1.87 goals-against average.
"I'm totally on the same page as the coach," Shields said.
"If a goalie is playing well and he doesn't lose, he should continue to play and deserves to play."
Giguere also understands that his starts will come and he's just glad to be playing at such a high level after missing the first five games of the season because of a slight groin strain.
"At first it was a little hard and it showed in the first two games that I played ...
I felt a little rusty," said Giguere, who gave up three goals in a loss to Tampa Bay in his first start.
"But it didn't take long for me to get it back because even though my leg was hurt in training camp, I worked really hard."
Center Steve Rucchin's injury turned out to be a little more serious than first revealed because the veteran center will miss at least the next three games because of a stress fracture of his left leg.
At first it was thought Rucchin only suffered a bad ankle sprain when he was hit by the puck on Sunday but an MRI on Wednesday discovered the break and he is not expected to begin skating again until this weekend.
The Ducks will start an 11-day trip at Columbus on Friday and Murray is pleased with what the team has been able to accomplish on their just concluded eight-game homestand, their longest of the season.
"We've had good practice time and the guys have worked really hard," he said.
"There are some games that we're going to have our hands full, but I think we're capable of winning them as well."
A spokesman for Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida network has repeated threats to carry out new terror attacks and said in a video aired Saturday that Muslims in the United States and Britain should avoid airplanes and tall buildings.
Sulaiman Abu Ghaith, speaking on a videotape on Qatar's Al-Jazeera satellite channel, also accused President Bush, his father, former President Clinton and the prime ministers of Israel and Britain of leading "crusaders" guilty of killing Muslims.
"The blood of those will not be lost in vain, God willing," he said.
The 8-minute statement was the third released by bin Laden's organization since the U.S.-led bombardment against the Taliban and al-Qaida began last Sunday, Oct. 7.
Abu Ghaith said in the tape that he was speaking on the fifth day of bombing, which was Thursday.
He said the U.S.-led air assault on Afghanistan has "eradicated entire villages" but did not name them.
Abu Ghaith also pledged to stand beside Afghanistan and praised Mullah Mohammed Omar, the supreme leader of Afghanistan's Taliban rulers.
He did not mention bin Laden.
Washington has said it is trying to avoid civilian deaths in its campaign, launched to root out bin Laden, the top suspect in the Sept. 11 terror attacks.
"We dismiss it.
This is just more propaganda," White House spokeswoman Jennifer Millerwise said Saturday night of the videotape.
Abu Ghaith repeated warnings made earlier this week of more attacks.
"When al-Qaida promises, it delivers, God willing," he said.
"The storms will not stop.
The storms of planes will not stop until you drag your defeated tails from Afghanistan, not until you raise your hands from the Jews in Palestine, not until you lift the embargo on the Iraqi people, not until you leave the Arabian peninsula, not until you stop supporting the Hindus against the Muslims in Kashmir," he said.
He advised Muslims in the United States and Britain "not to ride planes and not to live in high buildings."
Abu Ghaith, a Kuwaiti who appeared with bin Laden in the first video released by the group Oct. 7, said Bush, his father, Clinton, Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon and British Prime Minister Tony Blair were "at the head of all the criminals, the Zionists and the crusaders, who have committed the worst practices and greatest atrocities against the Muslim nation."
"Millions of Muslim men, women and children have been killed without committing any sins," he said.
He said al-Qaida had ordered the Americans and British to leave the Arabian Peninsula because the "land will burn with fire under their feet, God willing."
Abu Ghaith denounced Islamic nations, accusing a gathering of foreign ministers from the 56-member Organization of the Islamic Conference this week of "supporting the strike."
"These people do not represent the masses in any way and don't have any legitimacy," he said of the OIC members.
The OIC session held in Qatar -- which the Taliban had asked to help stop the U.S. air campaign -- did not directly condemn the bombing, instead only expressing concern over civilian casualties. 
Copyright 2001 Associated Press
"Very close, but it looks like a net three for Republicans," White House press secretary Ari Fleischer said Wednesday as he assessed overnight election results and suggested they were no reflection on Bush or the national Republican Party.
"Obviously the president is a Republican and the president is pleased with Republican victories," Fleischer said.
"But when you take a look at this in sum, I think it's fair to say it was a close election throughout the country
and it was mostly decided on local issues, local campaigns."
Tuesday's outcome, taken together with special-election results earlier this year, left Republicans with a net gain of three state legislature seats across the country, plus fresh control of the Pennsylvania Supreme Court, Fleischer said.
He sounded on the verge of saying that Democratic governors-elect Jim McGreevey in New Jersey and Mark Warner in Virginia had good issues on their side.
But the presidential spokesman caught himself.
"Clearly the Democrats have some good iss -- uh, uh, wins in Virginia and New Jersey," Fleischer said.
Democrats can rightfully brag about McGreevey's victory, Fleischer added.
"Although we do note in Virginia, particularly, the winning candidate basically ran as a Republican. ...
The ideas he ran on were rather right of center."
Bush telephoned the Republican gubernatorial losers -- New Jersey's Bret Schundler and Virginia's Mark Earley -- Tuesday night "to offer his condolences about the outcomes of the race," Fleischer said.
The president placed a congratulatory call Wednesday to Republican Michael Bloomberg, winner of the New York City mayoral race.
Asked if the media mogul, only a recent convert to the GOP, basically ran as a Democrat in a heavily Democratic city, Fleischer replied: "Mr. Bloomberg had not been a Republican all his life, and I think people were aware of that, and I think there is something to be said about that."
Bush, who has avoided overt politicking since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, did not hit the campaign trail for any of the Republican candidates, although he did support them with mass mailings and automated phone messages to voters.
Some White House aides did volunteer work in the homestretch of Schundler's campaign.
The White House is still considering whether Bush will participate -- as some GOP activists are expecting -- in a Nov. 28 Washington fund-raiser for brother Jeb's Florida gubernatorial re-election campaign. 
Copyright 2001 Associated Press
Terror:
Officials find their public health and safety systems aren't up to the task and scramble for costly improvements.
Two years ago, the Justice Department set aside $150 million to help states purchase response gear for civil emergencies.
Before Sept. 11, one state applied for a share of the money. 
Now, the rush is on.
State after state is pushing for the money as local and regional officials realize how unprepared they are in the wake of the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon. 
"We're just, frankly, not ready," said Vermont Gov. Howard Dean, who is especially concerned about biological threats. 
The fixes are expensive, and as budgets slide from surplus into deficit in state after state, a few critics argue that the money would be better spent addressing dangers that clearly plague public health now--drug abuse, say, or smoking--rather than looking ahead to an amorphous terrorist threat.
Others caution that anti-terror shopping lists are premature: The first order of business, they contend, is for the federal government to deliver a realistic assessment of what type of attacks are most likely. 
"You can't protect against every fanciful, conceivable, unlikely scenario.
You can't," Oklahoma Gov. Frank Keating said. 
But with Atty.
Gen. John Ashcroft warning of "a clear and present danger to Americans," many state and local officials feel compelled to move as quickly as they can--in as many directions as they can. 
Most have taken the obvious precautions to bolster security, from installing metal detectors in high-profile buildings to fencing off drinking water supplies.
In St. Louis, law enforcement officers have started conducting random searches of trucks on the interstate.
In Illinois, state police have been ordered to carry enough food and water to sustain them for three days in case they can't get back home in a crisis. 
Arizona has launched a 24-hour hotline for tips about potential terrorists; it has logged more than 600 calls.
California has set up a central database to track all threats and hoaxes statewide.
In Georgia, the directors of 60 state agencies met behind barbed wire recently to assess state readiness.
In Missouri, Gov. Bob Holden created a new Cabinet post for homeland security. 
Those are quick and inexpensive measures.
Experts say they are not enough. 
To gird for attack--and especially for chemical or biological strikes--every state, they say, must fortify its health care infrastructure, stockpile more vaccines and antidotes and load up on supplies for emergency response crews.
Among the most pressing problems experts cite:
Many hospitals have, at most, one decontamination shower--capable of processing just a couple of chemical-attack victims per hour.
Some fire departments also have mobile decontamination units to help out.
The alternative: herding victims to a staging area, stripping them and spraying them with fire hoses.
"If you want to know what the short pole on the tent is, that's where it is in most cities," said Larry Gispert, emergency management director for Hillsborough County in Florida. 
Medical authorities often have no rapid way to communicate the health alerts critical for an effective response to a germ attack.
Experts say 25% of public health departments don't have e-mail; fewer than half have high-speed Internet access.
The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta reported two years ago that only 45% of local health departments had the capacity for "broadcast faxing," which would allow them to transmit alerts to all labs and physicians in their areas. 
Only five public health labs in the country can test human specimens for exposure to the types of chemicals that most likely would be used in a terrorist attack.
Most hospital labs are unable to diagnose exposure to biological weapons, such as anthrax or smallpox.
And only 37 states have CDC experts assigned to help them spot unusual patterns of infection. 
Many communities have no workable surveillance system to detect unexpected surges in illness that could signal an outbreak of diseases, such as smallpox.
In Boston, a computer program automatically records admissions to every emergency room daily--and follows up on any spike within hours.
But many cities still rely on physicians to fill out paperwork for every flu-like illness they treat, a cumbersome system that often ends up being ignored.
"The most neglected aspect of our defense is the whole public health infrastructure," said Greg Evans, director of the Center for the Study of Bioterrorism in St. Louis. 
In an appearance before the Senate Committee on Health, Education and Labor on Tuesday, Dr. Michael T. Osterholm--director of the center for infectious disease research at the University of Minnesota--reiterated that most hospitals and other facilities are unprepared for a large-scale bioterrorism attack.
A major assault "would overwhelm most existing state and local systems within a few days," Osterholm said. 
In Houston alone, officials assessing public health needs came up with a $4-million shopping list--and that was before Sept. 11.
They expect to add more items soon, from protective gear for doctors to decontamination units for major hospitals.
If the federal government doesn't cover the tab, city officials are considering asking the local business community for donations. 
"At this point, we're looking at any and all options," said Craig McDowell, the city's emergency services manager.
"I don't know that you're ever totally prepared.
But we want to be as prepared as we can be." 
Authorities across the country emphasize that they are not starting from scratch. 
The federal government has been prodding communities to gird for weapons of mass destruction at least since 1995, when a Japanese cult released sarin nerve gas in a Tokyo subway, killing 12 people and injuring hundreds. 
More than 270,000 firefighters, police and paramedics have been trained to respond to such threats.
Special National Guard teams in 27 states also have been formed to handle chemical or biological attacks--some of them working on virtual reality simulators to practice evacuating a city in crisis. 
The Justice Department has even organized drills in 120 cities, laying out a disaster scenario and asking officials to run through their responses. 
Utah, which will host the 2002 Winter Olympics, was the only state to complete the lengthy application to tap into the Justice Department's $150-million fund to purchase emergency equipment, such as protective suits and respirators.
Yet other federal grants have been available over the years for such purchases. 
And some agencies have moved aggressively to stock up.
The Los Angeles County Fire Department, for example, has spent $1 million from its own budget and at least $400,000 in grant money on training and equipment over the last few years.
As a result, every firefighter now carries an "escape mask" to flee a chemical cloud, along with an injectable nerve gas antidote.
But Chief P. Michael Freeman recognizes that such preparation is not the norm. 
"It's been kind of hit or miss around the nation," he said. 
In Missouri, for instance, only 5% to 10% of "first responders"--the emergency personnel who would be first to a scene--have the equipment to withstand chemical or biological exposure.
"
Right now, we're not ready," said Robb Pilkington, a terrorism specialist who trains the state's rescue workers. 
Florida's wish list includes 1,400 pairs of chemical-resistant boots for rescue workers.
Arizona is buying 900 protective biocontainment suits, one for each state police officer.
In Alabama, emergency coordinator Woody Odom needs equipment to detect chemical or biological agents. 
California needs more high-tech equipment too, and also more training for first responders.
But Emergency Services Director Dallas Jones hopes to avoid a frenzy of panic buying.
"We want to do this with a comprehensive regional plan," he said.
"Every hospital in the state doesn't necessarily need a 900-person-per-hour decontamination unit." 
Even before the Sept. 11 attacks, the Bush administration had asked Congress to appropriate $104 million for local purchases of emergency response gear.
More recently, Sens. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) and Bill Frist (R-Tenn.) have proposed spending $1.6 billion to counter bioterrorism. 
"I really believe that the majority of funding items will be handled by the federal government," said retired Army Col. Timothy Daniels, Missouri's new homeland security chief. 
But experts caution that spending is only one way to prepare. 
John Thomasian, who directs the think-tank branch of the National Governors Assn., recommends legislation that would give health officials the authority to seize property or to mandate medical exams so that they could identify and contain any infectious epidemic. 
Fire chiefs call for better efforts to establish common radio frequencies, so all emergency personnel can communicate. 
In some cases, better preparation would be as simple as freeing up staff to draft an emergency response plan.
Fewer than 25% of county and city health departments have such a plan.
Of those that do, fewer than half have tested it with drills, according to the departments' professional association. 
One final prong of the preparation effort is public outreach: getting the word out to citizens not to panic.
Some local officials fear that the drumbeat of warnings on bioterrorism will prompt a run on hospitals as people see every sniffle as a sign of anthrax poisoning.
"We're very concerned that, with the winter flu season coming on, if we don't tone down the rhetoric we could very easily find ourselves overwhelmed," said Chuck Lanza, emergency director for Miami-Dade County in Florida. 
With so many disparate needs identified--and so many urgent holes to fill--state and local anti-terrorism efforts have been somewhat scattered in the weeks since Sept. 11.
As Freeman put it: "It has not yet coalesced into a national strategy." 
That doesn't trouble Brad Roberts, an anti-terrorism expert at the private Institute for Defense Analyses, a think tank that advises the Pentagon.
In fact, Roberts suggested, a diffuse approach may well be the best national strategy of all. 
"The problem we face is so fuzzy . . .
we cannot precisely tailor a response," Roberts said.
"We have to strengthen our defenses across a broad range of issues--and hope that, when a crisis comes, we've done enough of the right things to make a difference."   
Times staff writers Aaron Zitner and Robert L. Jackson in Washington contributed to this report.
In overtime, in the first of back-to-back games in cities separated by all of Texas and more, the Lakers gave the basketball to Shaquille O'Neal.
As a result, they haven't yet lost, seven games and nearly three weeks into a season that went from mundane to mad in two days off.
The Lakers defeated the Houston Rockets, 98-97, Thursday night at Compaq Center, where O'Neal scored 30 points, including seven of the Lakers' 11 in the overtime.
O'Neal also had 13 rebounds, the last on a wild final-second shot by Kevin Willis.
And as the Rockets, who once trailed by 15 points, cried for a foul and the Lakers stood and pushed toward their locker room, O'Neal swung the ball ferociously, celebrating a difficult victory against the Rockets' cut-and-slash set.
"We play better when we have to fight," said O'Neal, who earlier in the day expressed some disdain for Coach Phil Jackson.
"So, good win for us."
Kobe Bryant scored 31 points and Lindsey Hunter, who missed two critical free throws late in the fourth quarter, clung desperately to Rocket point guard Steve Francis through every late, pivotal possession.
Hunter had five steals and four assists.
Bryant had the other Rocket guard, Cuttino Mobley, quick and smart as Francis, particularly on the high pick-and-rolls.
Together, Francis and Mobley scored 52 points, but were 18 for 47 from the floor, and the Lakers were satisfied with that.
"Guarding guys like Stevie Francis, you have to be ready," Hunter said.
"Guys like that are going to attack all night.
Reminds me a little of Allen Iverson."
O'Neal missed a jump hook near the end of regulation and lost the rebound out of bounds.
But that wasn't why they played an overtime.
Hunter missed two free-throw attempts with 16.5 seconds left, after the Rockets smothered Bryant on an in-bounds play.
Mobley made two free throws 10 seconds later, and the overtime began at 87-87.
O'Neal dominated the next five minutes, however, and the Lakers were 7-0.
"I've played against him for 10 years and now he is coming into his own even more," Willis said of O'Neal. "
He's gotten better as he's gotten mature."
O'Neal had a daughter, Amirah Sanaa, on Tuesday.
Her name, O'Neal said, means "pure" and "beautiful" in the Muslim faith. ...
Former Laker Mike Penberthy cleared waivers, and then received some interest from the Miami Heat, but remains unsigned.
Records--Lakers 7-0,
Suns 4-5.
Record vs. Suns--1-0.
Update--
The Lakers beat the Suns, 117-94, two weeks ago at Staples Center.
The two Jakes--centers Voskuhl and Tsakalidis--had no chance against Shaquille O'Neal, who had 36 points and 13 rebounds.
Asia: To angry fans, athlete's disqualification is another reflection of American arrogance.
Just when you thought the 2002 Winter Olympics were over, the furor lives on in Seoul.
South Korean fans are still nursing a grudge over their man's loss of the gold medal last week in the 1,500-meter short-track skating competition to American Apolo Anton Ohno.
Thousands of South Koreans are participating in an online fund-raising campaign to buy a $1,350 replica of the gold medal, which they hope to present Wednesday to skater Kim Dong Sung on his return from Salt Lake City.
They have launched angry e-mail campaigns against the U.S. Olympic Committee; against NBC, which televised the Olympics; and against comedian Jay Leno, who rubbed salt in the wound with a biting joke about Korean anger.
It is not simply a question of sports.
The loss of the gold medal is widely perceived here as part of a larger conspiracy by the United States to override South Korea's interests in favor of its own agenda.
"This kind of American arrogance, which disregards international justice and the pureness of sports, reflects U.S. President George W. Bush's unilateral diplomatic policies," said ruling party legislator Kim Seong Ho in a statement Monday to the National Assembly.
Bush's visit to Seoul last week drew many protests from South Koreans who, despite Washington's declarations to the contrary, fear that the United States will invade the North.
Kim also echoed the complaints of many South Koreans that the United States improperly politicized the Olympics to drum up support for its campaign against terrorism and turned the Games into "a private memorial service for the victims of the New York terrorist attacks.
"
Jang Yung Je, a manager at Haansoft Computers and one of the organizers of the fund-raising campaign to replicate the gold medal for skater Kim, said she believes that the Olympic judges wanted to give the United States more than its rightful share of gold to salve the wounds of Sept. 11.
"The most commonly heard theory is that America wanted to regain its pride that was torn by the terrorist attacks and that they expected to be compensated by the judges," Jang said.
"I believe that too."
In an editorial published Monday, the English-language Korea Herald declared that "a new Cold War has started" over the "scandalous proceedings in Salt Lake City."
The skating ruling, widely criticized even outside South Korea, was made by an Australian referee during the Wednesday night race.
Three days of appeals, first to the International Skating Union and then to the Court of Arbitration for Sport, failed to advance the South Korean delegation's complaints.
The Russian, Japanese, Canadian, Chinese and Ukrainian delegations also have complained about the Games--the Russians the loudest.
But South Koreans turned to the weapon they best deploy: the Internet.
Within hours of the race, the U.S. Olympic Committee Internet server crashed under the weight of 16,000 e-mails, most of them from South Korea, one of the most wired countries in the world.
Some of the e-mails were so threatening, especially toward skater Ohno, who is Japanese American, that the FBI opened an investigation.
About 48,000 South Korean fans staged a cyber-attack on NBC.
Leno has been a particular target of their wrath after cracking a joke about the skater kicking and eating his dog.
South Koreans are particularly sensitive to foreign criticism of their penchant for dog meat.
More than 100 South Korean Internet sites have launched Olympic protests since the controversial race.
Angry sports fans have also deluged South Korean government sites with demands for a nationwide boycott of American products.
"The U.S. is the axis of evil in sports," read one typical entry last weekend on an Internet site.
"Let the world see united Koreans. . . .
Let us not repeat our history in which we never took revenge!" proclaimed another.
One sociologist here suggested that the dramatic reaction to the Olympics reflects a long-standing Korean complex about being the underdog.
"Korea has been surrounded and dominated by bigger countries throughout its history--by China, by Japan, these days by America.
We are defensive because of that," said Lew Suk Choon of Yonsei University.
"One gold medal might not mean very much to a big country like the United States, but to us it means international recognition."
"We are a small country.
This is the only way we can fight back," agreed Min Lee, a 33-year-old worker for a security company who has been participating in the cyber-war.
During the 1988 Olympics in Seoul, a South Korean boxer staged a memorable sit-in, refusing to leave the ring for 67 minutes to protest a referee's ruling against him.
During the same match, coaches and fans threw chairs at the referee.
Michael Breen, author of "The Koreans," said Koreans tend to "project insecure nationalism onto their athletes because historically they felt the world was against them."
Breen also chalked up the intense reaction to the Olympics this year to the emotional character of the South Korean people.
He recalled that many times during important soccer games, he has read newspaper reports of fans dying of heart attacks from cheering too much.
"This is a country filled with passion and emotion," Breen said.
"They lose rationality.
But then again, don't all fans?"
Chi Jung Nam in The Times' Seoul Bureau contributed to this report.
Defense: Rumsfeld, en route to Moscow, says military can't slow down its campaign while Afghans organize new leadership.
He is to visit Central Asian allies.
Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld said Friday that the United States has not muted and will not mute the military campaign in Afghanistan to give opposition leaders time to form a political coalition acceptable to American interests.
"I don't think it's possible to manage the work on the ground,
the war campaign on the ground, against a political timetable that's unpredictable," Rumsfeld told reporters accompanying him to Moscow.
"For us to sit around and say, well, we are smart enough that maybe we can delay this so this happens instead of that . . .
is ridiculous.
We have not done that in the past, we are not doing it now and we do not intend to do it in the future."
Rumsfeld confirmed that among the anti-Taliban leaders who have received help from the U.S. is Hamid Karzai, a Western-oriented tribal leader who entered Afghanistan to organize resistance to the Taliban.
Rumsfeld said the U.S. sent supplies including food, water and ammunition to Karzai on Thursday.
He said the U.S. does not have military personnel with Karzai and his supporters, but he hinted that the Pentagon plans to send someone to accompany Karzai at the first opportunity.
Arriving here today for talks with senior Russian officials on missile defense, nuclear force reductions and the war on terrorism, Rumsfeld said it remains to be seen how President Vladimir V. Putin's new cooperative relationship with Washington will affect strategic negotiations on missile defense and the Antiballistic Missile Treaty.
But Rumsfeld, in remarks to reporters on his plane en route to Moscow, said Putin's immediate offer of assistance after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on New York and near Washington established him as a leader willing to work "with the West and the rest of the world to help us deal with this terrible problem."
Rumsfeld's trip comes in advance of President Bush's summit with Putin in the United States 10 days from now.
U.S. and Russian officials say they are hopeful that the two leaders can announce a new strategic "understanding" that would allow the Pentagon to pursue extensive missile defense testing without scrapping the ABM accord.
With two former Soviet republics that border Afghanistan--Uzbekistan and Tajikistan--now providing assistance to U.S. military forces waging the military campaign against the ruling Taliban militia, Rumsfeld added on to his Moscow trip to strengthen contacts with leaders in those countries.
He is scheduled to travel to both former Soviet republics later today.
He will travel Sunday to Pakistan, a key ally bordering Afghanistan, and then to India.
He is scheduled to return to Washington on Monday night.
Rumsfeld denied reports that the Pentagon and the State Department have been at odds over how the war is being waged.
He said that the two agencies have been encouraging opposition forces within Afghanistan to form a provisional government, but that those discussions have not slowed military action in the region or affected battle strategy.
"We are going forward as rapidly as is humanly possible to see that the war on the ground is prosecuted as effectively as can be done, and we are putting people in there as fast as we can to provide the kind of liaison assistance that we believe will be helpful," Rumsfeld said.
On the subject of the arms control talks in Moscow, Rumsfeld said his announcement last week that the Pentagon had postponed several missile defense tests that might have violated the accord was designed to show that the treaty has become an impediment to the administration's ambitious missile defense agenda.
He said it was not a conciliatory nod to Russia, as it has been portrayed.
"I'm not suggesting we delay withdrawal from the treaty," Rumsfeld said.
"All I have said publicly on the subject is what the president has said: We need to set the treaty aside and establish a new relationship between the United States and Russia. . . .
The president has said we will deploy missile defense.
That can't be done with a treaty there that's an impediment."
Mike Modano scored twice, including the go-ahead goal with 9:41 remaining, and Joe Nieuwendyk had a pair of second-period goals 56 seconds apart as the Dallas Stars beat the Los Angeles Kings 4-3 Thursday night.
Mike Modano scored twice, including the go-ahead goal with 9:41 remaining, and Joe Nieuwendyk had a pair of second-period goals 56 seconds apart as the Dallas Stars beat the Los Angeles Kings 4-3 Thursday night.
Jarome Iginla recorded his second straight two-goal game, and Denis Gauthier had a goal and an assist as the Calgary Flames ran their unbeaten streak to five games Thursday night with a 3-2 victory over the Los Angeles Kings.
Not so long ago, this year's version of the cross-town rivalry between USC and UCLA looked certain to be a mismatch.
And that's exactly how it turned out.
But no one expected Saturday afternoon's game to be a romp for the Trojans, who parlayed a smothering defense and a few big offensive plays into a 27-0 victory over UCLA at the Coliseum, their third consecutive victory in the rivalry and the first shutout since 1947.
The win capped the Trojans' comeback from a 1-4 start, improving their record to 6-5 in Coach Pete Carroll's first season.
They are assured a postseason game, most likely in the Las Vegas Bowl on Christmas Day.
Meanwhile, the loss sent a reeling UCLA even deeper into a funk.
The Bruins, who came into the game ranked No. 20, have now lost four consecutive games after racing to a 6-0 start.
"I love it," USC quarterback Carson Palmer said.
"We're going in a good direction.
They're not."
It has been a forgettable few weeks for the Bruins.
Tailback DeShaun Foster was declared ineligible for the remainder of the season for borrowing a car--an "extra benefit" in NCAA terms--from a Hollywood actor/director.
More recently, it was discovered quarterback Cory Paus had been convicted of drunk driving before the season and must serve jail time.
Asked if the distractions had caught up with his teammates and him, Paus said: "I think the team was as focused as we could be."
His coach, Bob Toledo, seemed stunned.
"I'm kind of speechless right now," Toledo said.
"We were totally inept out there."
on the other had, looked like a team that has gained confidence from four consecutive victories.
Playing before a crowd of 88,588, the Trojans gave a hint of things to come on their first possession.
Facing third and 13, Palmer threw what might have been a simple 10-yard pass to Kori Dickerson except the tight end broke a tackle and sprinted 66 yards up the sideline.
Suddenly, the Trojans were out of a hole.
Palmer made good on it a few plays later, throwing a four-yard touchdown pass to Keary Colbert.
All week long, Colbert stood on the sideline in practice with sore ankles.
But when he stepped onto the field Saturday, he said, "I saw all those people and the pain just went away."
On the scoring play, Colbert got one of his heavily taped feet--"The bad one ...
they're both bad"--just over the goal line for a 7-0 lead.
"You could tell early," Carroll said.
"We had a shot at playing a great ballgame."
But if the offense got things started, it was defense that made the difference.
The Bruins were expected to come with the running game, even without Foster in the backfield.
The Trojans weren't buying it.
Early in the week, the coaching staff decided to let the defensive linemen go after Paus without worrying about their gaps.
It was something of a gamble, putting an onus on the linebackers to clean up any running backs who might slip through.
But the coaches simply did not believe reserve tailbacks Manuel White and Akil Harris could hurt them.
So the defense tried every trick in the book, from blitzes to stunts to a zone drop that had defensive end Omar Nazel covering receiver Craig Bragg on one play in the second quarter.
"We called everything on the sheet about three times," Carroll said.
There was a moment, however flickering, when this strategy threatened to backfire.
UCLA looked to be mounting a drive late in the first quarter with White rushing three consecutive times for 17 yards.
Then, unexpectedly, Paus dropped back and threw to Brian Poli-Dixon.
What happened next was just as inexplicable.
The ball bounced off Poli-Dixon and hit cornerback Antuan Simmons in the leg.
Simmons trapped it with one hand, brought it behind him and between his legs.
Everyone else seemed frozen.
The senior--who came back from life-threatening surgery less than two years ago--ran 36 yards for a touchdown and a 14-0 lead.
That margin grew to 17-0 at halftime.
Gone was UCLA's determination to establish the run.
Gone was any semblance of patience.
"We couldn't generate anything," Toledo said.
"We were too far behind to keep running the football and we weren't running well anyway."
So Paus began dropping back on almost every play and the numbers began to pile up against UCLA.
By evening's end, the Bruins totaled only 114 yards of offense, a mere 28 of those on the ground.
They fumbled the ball away once and threw three interceptions and had a punt blocked.
Paus completed only seven of 15 passes for 45 yards, and two of those interceptions, before being replaced in the fourth quarter.
"It was a pretty tough game for the offense and for me," the quarterback said.
"USC was throwing a lot of heat at us."
The Trojan offense all but finished things off in the third quarter.
Palmer, who passed for an efficient 180 yards and a touchdown, ran the option and pitched to tailback Chris Howard.
The Trojans had planned to use the freshman as a counterpoint to starter Sunny Byrd, a straight-ahead grinder, but had waited.
"I was getting jittery," Howard said.
"I wanted to get in the game and make my mark."
His 34-yard touchdown run up the sideline did nicely.
Kicker David Davis made his second short field goal in the fourth quarter and, for the Trojans, there was only one thing left.
The defense had come into the game ranked second in the conference behind UCLA and had taken the whole thing personally.
As the minutes wound down, middle linebacker Mike Pollard was screaming at his teammates:
"Let's get the goose egg."
It was an unforeseen conclusion to a game that, only a few weeks ago, looked like a possible rout for the Bruins.
"To come back from where we were," USC fullback Charlie Landrigan said walking off the field.
"Who would believe it?"
In 1998, after terrorist attacks on U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, the Clinton administration considered staging a commando raid against the presumed mastermind, Osama bin Laden, former U.S. officials and defense scholars now say.
But the idea was abandoned because of the risk of casualties and the military's hesitance to commit U.S. troops to the campaign against terrorism.
"Instead, we chose to shoot off a few missiles (at bin Laden) in the hope that he wouldn't change location--
but, of course, he did," said Michael E. O'Hanlon, a defense expert at the Brookings Institution.
That sort of thinking may be about to change.
Last week's attacks inside the United States seem likely to have a profound, long-term impact on U.S. defense and foreign policies.
The events may have shaken some of the fundamental assumptions that have held sway for a decade or more.
"Like Pearl Harbor, like the Soviet subversion of Czechoslovakia in 1948, what this event will do is to break the paradigm and to change the way we deal with issues," said Richard Solomon, director of the U.S. Institute of Peace.
During the 1990s, from Bosnia-Herzegovina to Kosovo province, from Iraq to Afghanistan, U.S. leaders grew increasingly reluctant to put troops into situations where some of them might be killed.
Policymakers worried that the public might not support casualties that occurred in distant locations whose importance seemed remote to ordinary Americans.
These political dynamics no longer apply.
Terrorism suddenly has claimed hundreds and perhaps thousands of lives, and the threat to ordinary Americans is as clear as the rubble in downtown Manhattan.
It is far too soon to say what will happen to the administration's missile defense proposal.
Within hours of Tuesday's catastrophes, critics of the initiative began arguing that the real threats to the United States don't come from missiles.
Supporters countered that terrorists who hijack planes today might use missiles next time.
No matter how that debate plays out, however, the administration will almost certainly be required to give less emphasis and attention to missile defense than it did before last week.
The Bush administration's energies will be consumed with counter-terrorism and military retaliation.
Missile defense could become almost an afterthought.
The Bush administration has already put new emphasis on the importance of allies.
Analysts say that in the coming months, U.S. ties with a range of countries-- notably Russia, China, Pakistan and Saudi Arabia-- are likely to change to take account of the administration's new preoccupation with combating terrorism.
"There is going to be a whole set of trade-offs," said James Steinberg, President Clinton's deputy national security director and now at the Brookings Institution.
"How much are we prepared to adjust our other policies in the interests of counter-terrorism?"
For instance, Steinberg asked, would the United States relax its insistence that Pakistan become more democratic?
"Or take China-- what might we do with China in order to get their help in putting pressure on Pakistan?
" he asked.
China, which has had a long-standing military and strategic relationship with Pakistan, is intensely opposed to the Bush administration's missile defense program.
That sets up a rough trade-off, one the Bush administration would not like to make:
The United States could back away from missile defense and gain help from China and Pakistan in a campaign against terrorism.
There were signs that in the hours after Tuesday's attacks, Chinese officials began trying to calculate how it might affect the Bush administration's missile defense program.
James Mulvenon, a China expert at the Rand Corp., said he received a phone call at home from a Chinese diplomat who asked about the possible impact on the future of missile defense.
"China will now drop about five or six notches on (America's) threat board," Mulvenon said last week.
Experts predict that for the first time in a decade, the United States will carry out military operations that rely as much on ground-combat forces as on missiles and other long-distance high-tech weaponry.
In war, said Andrew J. Bacevich, professor of international relations at Boston University, the calculus of zero casualties does not apply.
Defense experts say a new campaign against terrorism would not greatly change the U.S. military deployment around the world.
"In the long run, this doesn't change the likelihood of having to fight any particular country, like North Korea or China," said O'Hanlon, of Brookings Institution.
"It could raise the possibility of a war against Iraq, if Iraq is found to have some complicity."
O'Hanlon predicted that the U.S. defense budget would gradually increase-- and that members of Congress might work out political compromises permitting both missile defense and new efforts to protect the American homeland against terrorism.
"The Republicans will get their missile defenses and the Democrats will get their homeland defense priorities," he said.
"The climate will be very hawkish.
Instead of fighting over which priority is more important, they will probably agree to do both."
Several other defense experts agreed.
"There will be more money for counter-terrorism, more money for homeland defense, and more money for missile defense," said Mulvenon.
Anthony Cordesman, a senior fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, said Tuesday's attacks will affect "every aspect of the way the government does business."
"There are 17 departments and agencies dealing with homeland defense, and every one of those is going to have to have its programs re-examined.
"Sure, we had been working on these issues for about 10 years," he said.
"But we were looking at a contingency that might occur.
Now, it's a reality."
The greatest impact of the attacks is likely to be a psychological one: It has galvanized the American public in a way that is certain to strengthen the country's foreign policy.
Yamamoto commanded the Japanese navy during its attack on the Pacific Fleet on Dec. 7, 1941.
Immediately afterward, he wrote in his diary, "I feel we have awakened a sleeping giant." 
U.S. Soccer took a significant step toward broadening the audience for its national team games Wednesday when it announced a new five-year television agreement with Telemundo.
Under terms of the partnership, the Spanish-language network--currently being purchased by NBC--will broadcast 10 U.S. games each year, including two U.S. women's national team matches, through the 2006 World Cup in Germany.
Telemundo "reaches 88% of the country's Hispanic population of 35 million ," Jorge Hidalgo, the network's senior vice president for sports, said Wednesday in Beverly Hills.
U.S. Soccer believes adding that potential audience to the one it already has on ABC, ESPN and ESPN2 will help soccer in the U.S. grow faster.
"Telemundo brings added passion and emotion to our sport," said Dan Flynn, U.S. Soccer's secretary general, a tacit admission that the English-language telecasts frequently fail to deliver that element.
In contrast, the Spanish-language network features not only vastly experienced soccer cameramen and directors but also the nation's top two soccer commentators, play-by-play announcer Andres Cantor and analyst Norberto Longo.
The pair will handle the U.S. games--both men's and women's--just as they do now for Mexico's national team.
Telemundo also has a long-term agreement with the Mexican soccer federation to broadcast its games in the U.S.
"We feel that we are the eyes and ears of the Hispanic viewers in the United States," Hidalgo said.
"We pay close attention to those viewers and try to respect their wishes regarding what they want to see when they want to see it, and basically respect the sport of soccer.
"It's a sport of passion, and unless you have the passion, you can't understand the passion."
Telemundo has carried some U.S. games for the past couple of years, but it was last year's World Cup qualifier between the U.S. and Mexico in Columbus, Ohio, that led both sides to expand the arrangement.
"We walked away from that match just thrilled not only with the result a 2-0 U.S. victory but with the audience on the English-language broadcast on ESPN," said Brad Hunt, a senior vice president for IMG, which negotiated the agreement.
"About a week later, Jorge Hidalgo said the Telemundo audience had been twice the size.
"At that point the lightbulb became very bright, that we should be finding a way to incorporate this Telemundo audience into the U.S. Soccer sponsorship audience.
That's what this contract is meant to do."
Telemundo will broadcast the U.S.-Honduras men's game live from Seattle on Saturday at 1 p.m., as well as seven more U.S. games leading up to the 2002 World Cup in Japan and South Korea.
One day after groundbreaking ceremonies for a 27,000-seat stadium in Carson for the Galaxy, Major League Soccer was dealt an unexpected blow when the city of McKinney, Texas, unexpectedly reversed its decision to build a similar soccer-specific stadium that would have served as home to the Dallas Burn.
On Jan. 28, the McKinney city council voted, 7-0, to approve construction of a 22,000-seat stadium, but on Wednesday city officials told MLS they had "elected to cease all negotiations on the project."
Don Garber, the MLS commissioner, promised to continue the search for a new stadium for the Burn, which now plays at the Cotton Bowl in Dallas.
Elsewhere in MLS, the Galaxy announced that it will play Cruz Azul of Mexico at 7:30 p.m. on March 12 at Titan Stadium on the Cal State Fullerton campus.
gave the shuttle Columbia astronauts permission Saturday to proceed with their full mission to renovate the Hubble Space Telescope despite clogged plumbing in their ship.
Optimism had been growing throughout the day, aboard Columbia and inside Mission Control, that the 11-day Hubble servicing mission would remain on track despite a problem with a radiator line used to shed heat from shuttle electronics.
The trouble had threatened to cut short the flight.
Debris in the line, possibly leftover from a welding job during Columbia's recent overhaul, resulted in a violation of flight safety rules during Friday's launch.
But mission director Phil Engelauf emphasized that engineers had become more comfortable with the reduced flow of Freon in the line, and that it would be sufficient for handling the increased heat load from shuttle systems during landing.
The final decision by mission managers came late in the afternoon as the seven astronauts slept.
It means the crew can press forward with Sunday morning's rendezvous with Hubble and five days of spacewalks to improve the telescope's electrical and scientific output.
Columbia's commander, Scott Altman, said earlier in the day that he and his crew were "charging ahead full speed with our eyes on the goal," regardless of what the outcome might be.
"To be honest, we've gone on the assumption that we're here to stay, that we're going to do our job, and we've just kind of kept that thought foremost in our minds," he said in an interview with The Associated Press.
Astronaut John Grunsfeld, the chief telescope repairman, said he was so busy preparing for the spacewalks that he didn't have time to ponder the coolant system problem -- or the threat of a shortened mission.
"One of the things that astronauts and a lot of other professionals are very good at is compartmentalizing certain types of concerns," Grunsfeld told the AP.
"We're letting the smart folks on the ground really worry for us."
The cooling system problem arose moments after Columbia reached orbit.
The flow of Freon in one of two coolant loops dropped drastically and even dipped a little below the safety limit.
Once the shuttle's payload bay doors were opened, exposing large radiators that dispel heat, the cooling problem was eased for the time being, Engelauf said.
But a concern did remain about landing day, when shuttle electronics generate additional heat and the payload doors are shut and can't radiate the excess.
Engineers wanted to assure themselves that the Freon flow in the clogged line would not worsen and that the unclogged line would stay that way.
The contamination in the line may be solder or wiring left over from welding that was part of Columbia's extensive two-year overhaul, Engelauf said.
Even though the pipe was flushed afterward, residue may have remained inside and, all these months later, been knocked loose by the force of liftoff.
"That's the speculation," Engelauf said.
"But we don't have any proof of that and we won't really be able to know until we get the vehicle back."
Records show a welding error happened during the overhaul, but the line was cleaned, inspected and recertified, said Kari Fluegel, a spokeswoman for United Space Alliance, a private contractor.
The flight rule pertaining to the coolant levels was written years ago and based on the assumption that all of the shuttle electronics would be running during landing, Engelauf said.
By shutting down some systems, the heat load would be reduced and the so-called red line, or safety limit, could be lowered.
"It would be a foolish waste of NASA's resources and the government's investment for us to arbitrarily decide to come home out of over-conservatism," he told reporters.
"If we can see our way clear with good engineering rationale to continue and fly that mission, that's what we are supposed to do."
Shuttle program manager Ron Dittemore said if any further degradation is noted in the flow of Freon, he and his team will have to reassess the situation.
With a flatter and presumably faster course for the Los Angeles Marathon on Sunday, Kenyan Benson Mbithi is intent on bettering the time of 2 hours 9 minutes 25 seconds set by countryman Simon Bor in the 1999 race.
Bor's time is the only sub-2:10 clocking in the L.A. Marathon since the race began in 1986, but Mbithi said Thursday at a news conference that it could be bested this year.
"We all want to break it," said Mbithi, who finished third last year after winning the 2000 race in 2:11:55.
"The fast course will make my legs go faster."
Kenyan Stephen Ndungu , who won last year's race in 2:13:13 in breezy conditions, didn't guarantee a better time than Bor's.
But he does expect to run faster than last year.
"I think we could run a 2:10 or possibly a 2:09," he said.
Kenyan Joseph Kariuki is the designated pace-setter for Sunday's race, but he said Thursday he wasn't sure what kind of pace he would be setting.
"I'm waiting for them to tell me what time I'm supposed to run," said Kariuki, who plans to pace the lead pack of runners for the first 18.6 miles.
"The pace will depend on the weather."
Perhaps indicative of U.S. marathon fortunes in recent years, there were no American runners in attendance at Thursday's news conference for elite runners.
Among nine athletes present were five Kenyan men, one Kenyan woman, two Romanian women and Mexico's Saul Mendoza , five-time defending champion in the wheelchair division.
Security: The attorney general tells Americans to guard against strikes on U.S. soil in the coming days.
For the second time this month, the FBI on Monday put out an extraordinary alert warning Americans that it has "credible" reason to believe there could be new terrorist attacks against the United States in the next week. 
The threat, though vaguely defined, was considered serious enough that Atty.
Gen. John Ashcroft canceled a trip to Toronto Monday afternoon.
He also issued an immediate alert to the nation's 18,000 law enforcement agencies, urging them to be extra vigilant in the coming days. 
The warning appears to have been triggered in part by concern that cells of Osama bin Laden's Al Qaeda terrorist network remain active and undetected in the United States and could be planning further attacks, according to law enforcement and intelligence sources. 
The warning is likely to generate even greater security safeguards at nuclear and electrical plants, sporting events, border crossings, overseas embassies and a host of other sites that could be vulnerable to terrorist attacks, officials said. 
Justice Department officials received word early Monday through unspecified channels about the prospect of a fresh round of attacks.
They quickly briefed President Bush, who agreed with the decision to put out a public alert, officials said. 
"The administration has concluded, based on information developed, that there may be additional terrorist attacks within the United States and against the United States' interests over the next week," Ashcroft told a hastily arranged news conference Monday afternoon. "
The administration views this information as credible, but unfortunately it does not contain specific information as to the type of attack or specific targets." 
A similar warning put out by the FBI on Oct. 11, believed to have been based on foreign intelligence reports relayed to the CIA, triggered a debate over whether the administration had crossed the precarious line between informing the public and stirring hysteria. 
With the spate of recent anthrax attacks, Monday's warning is likely to trigger even greater anxiety than the first alert, less than three weeks ago.
FBI Director Robert Mueller said at the news conference that although the intelligence data do not include a specific target or an intended method, he believes that informing the public about even a broad-based threat "could well prevent another terrorist attack." 
Ashcroft said that he, too, felt compelled to publicize the threat.
"I trust the American people to be able to understand, in this context of conflict, where there is a front overseas and there is another front here in the United States, that they can make good judgments and can understand this kind of information." 
Counter-terrorism expert Daniel Benjamin, a National Security Council aide in the Clinton administration, said authorities run the risk of having the public ignore their warnings if they put out too many alerts. 
"That's a real danger, but at the same time if you've got a credible source you have to go with it," he said.
"It would be politically disastrous if something happened and it was shown afterwards that they had foreknowledge." 
In Los Angeles, police said they would reevaluate potential threats in the area and perhaps step up some patrols.
But the LAPD essentially will remain on the same heightened alert that it has been on since Sept. 11, when Chief Bernard Parks all but declared a tactical alert, said department spokesman Lt. Horace Frank. 
"This is always a concern for us.
We are going to assess the information and make a decision as to where we go from here," Frank said.
"What the attorney general is asking us to do is identify the credible threat areas within our command and pay close attention to them.
We already have been doing that." 
While the FBI has put out dozens of narrowly focused warnings since Sept. 11 about crop dusters, trucks carrying hazardous materials and a slew of other potential threats, this is only the second broad nationwide warning that it has issued.
Unlike the Oct. 11 warning, which was released as a written statement, both Ashcroft and Mueller appeared at Monday's news conference to announce it. 
"It is very extraordinary that they are putting out yet another threat of this nature," said Robert Blitzer, the FBI's former counter-terrorism chief.
"For the attorney general and the director of the FBI to get up and do this together, that tells me this is just a very, very serious threat.
That just doesn't happen every day." 
Counter-terrorism experts said the warning does more than merely inform the public and law enforcement agencies to be on guard.
"It puts the bad guys on notice, saying, 'We're on to you,' and it might prevent whatever attack is being planned," Blitzer said. 
"What's really prompting all this," said one FBI investigator who asked not to be identified, "is that there is substantial evidence showing that the 19 hijackers were supported by and were known to others who remain in the United States, in western Europe and in moderate nations in the Middle East. . . .
And there's plenty of reason to believe that there are more people among us who are prepared to be martyrs." 
Vince Cannistraro, former counter-terrorism chief for the CIA, agreed. 
According to information provided to Cannistraro on Monday by current CIA officials, authorities are clearly concerned that Al Qaeda "still has some people in the United States and they don't know where they are and
it has them terrified," Cannistraro said. 
"There is a lot of intelligence indicating that people within the United States will hit us, and hit us very hard," he said, adding that U.S. authorities "just don't know the what, and where and when."
Diplomacy: 'Please remember the wariness' of Asia over Japanese militancy, Jiang says.
Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi came to China on Monday to allay fears over his country's military involvement in the war on terrorism and to assuage lasting Chinese anger over Tokyo's military aggression during World War II.
Koizumi spent just six hours in the Chinese capital meeting with President Jiang Zemin and Premier Zhu Rongji, whose government has cautioned Tokyo to be "prudent" in giving any military backing to the U.S.-led strike on Afghanistan.
Although Japan is likely to offer only rear-guard technical and logistical support, Beijing remains deeply mistrustful of a neighbor it still casts as a former aggressor unwilling to own up fully to its shameful wartime past.
But the Communist regime here also is eager to appear constructive in the United States' declared war on global terrorism.
A Japanese government official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said Koizumi's meetings with Jiang and Zhu were "very positive."
"We can say the tense phase of the bilateral relationship has been improved by today's meetings," the official quoted Jiang as saying at the conclusion of the talks.
The discussions focused on both the history and the imminent future of Japanese military action.
To support the U.S.-driven effort to root out Osama bin Laden, the man accused of masterminding the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, Tokyo is set to pass a law allowing Japanese troops to engage in the closest they have come to combat in half a century.
The plan would dispatch Japanese warships to offer medical and transport assistance to U.S. and allied troops mounting the battle in Central Asia, as well as humanitarian aid to refugees.
Despite the plan's limited scope, the Beijing regime remains leery of any expansion of Japan's military role and of the long-standing security ties between Japan and the U.S., which it sees as coming at the expense of its own preeminence in Asia.
Jiang told Koizumi that Japan's wish to help with the strike against terrorism is understandable but asked him to "please remember the wariness of Asian countries" about Japanese military action, the official said, adding that Koizumi reiterated the "very clear principle" that Japan not use force.
"This is because we learned from the past that Japanese military action victimized so many people," he said.
Even so, the Chinese government has long accused Japan of showing too little remorse for its brutal occupation of China, which cost millions of Chinese lives.
After Koizumi's August visit to a shrine honoring Japan's war dead, including officers from World War II, China's leaders rebuffed his overtures for a meeting for weeks.
They relented with Monday's quick-hit visit, Koizumi's first as prime minister.
The whirlwind tour began symbolically with a stop at the Marco Polo Bridge outside Beijing, where Japanese troops used a skirmish as an excuse for launching a full invasion in 1937.
Koizumi is only the second Japanese prime minister to visit the bridge.
Afterward, he repeated expressions of regret for the suffering his country inflicted on its giant neighbor.
Koizumi offered "his heartfelt apology and condolences" to those in China who fell victim to Japan's aggression.
But Koizumi's statement stopped short of the written apology China has demanded.
The sole U.S. producer of anthrax vaccine, already facing trouble from government regulators, was hit Friday with a private multimillion dollar lawsuit alleging negligence in its manufacturing procedures.
The suit against BioPort Corp. of Lansing, Mich., was filed in federal district court here and is believed to be the first action on behalf of soldiers allegedly harmed by vaccine shots they were required to take.
Company spokeswoman Kim Brennen Root said officials could not comment because they have not seen the complaint.
Root acknowledged the company has had deficiencies noted by inspectors for the Food and Drug Administration, but she said the company expects a positive report on its procedures from federal regulators within the next six months.
The lawsuit, filed on behalf of one deceased and one injured soldier, notes that most of the vaccine produced by BioPort was administered to about 150,000 U.S. military personnel.
The military began vaccinations in the early 1990s, sparked by concerns about the potential use of anthrax as a biological weapon by the Iraqi government.
Unlike antibiotics such as Cipro that are prescribed for people who have been exposed to anthrax, the vaccine is taken as a preventive measure.
The legal complaint alleges that the efficacy of the vaccine in the mass immunization program for the military was never sufficiently tested, nor were adverse reactions by soldiers accurately assessed.
"There was insufficient data to demonstrate protection against inhalation anthrax," the lawsuit says.
The plaintiffs are the heirs of Army Spc.
Sandra Larson of Spokane, Wash., who died on June 12, 2000, and Ronda Wilson, of Savannah, Ga., a former soldier whose chronic ill health allegedly resulted from the vaccine.
According to the lawsuit, Larson began receiving her six injections in late 1998 and "almost immediately ... began having adverse reactions to the vaccine, including exhaustion and fatigue, skin rashes and numbness and pain in her hands."
When these symptoms did not dissipate, she was admitted to a military hospital, where she later lapsed into a coma and died, the complaint said.
Wilson, a helicopter pilot, also began receiving adverse reactions "almost immediately" after receiving her innoculations in late 1998, including rapid weight loss and an inability to eat solid foods, the lawsuit alleged.
"We're not trying to stop production of the vaccine," said plaintiffs' attorney Alan C. Milstein of Pennsauken, N.J.
"But we want to compensate soldiers who were given the vaccine involuntarily and, as a result, were hurt or died while trying to serve their country."
Milstein added, "We would also like to guarantee that others who are vaccinated in the future obtain a product that is safe and effective."
Plaintiffs charge that the innoculations of Larson and Wilson have been traced to batches of vaccine that in one case were improperly stored for a period at room temperatures instead of being refrigerated or, in another case, from a lot that was contaminated with micro-organisms.
Some independent authorities noted that, despite claims in the lawsuit, no proof has surfaced that BioPort's vaccine is defective or harmful.
In a study published two years ago in the Journal of the American Medical Association, 14 experts in civilian biodefense reported that 590,000 doses of anthrax vaccine had been administered to members of the armed forces and, "no serious adverse events have been causally related."
The Defense Department has the rights to all anthrax vaccine produced by BioPort, but the company has been unable to release any of its product to the Pentagon since 1998 while awaiting approval by the Food and Drug Administration, officials said.
Quality control failures noted by FDA inspectors included the improper reuse of expired vaccine, inadequate testing and the use of lots that failed testing, according to court papers.
The company received $126 million from the Pentagon as part of its efforts to eliminate problems in quality control.
Earlier this week, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said the military, as the sole customer of BioPort, was looking at ways to assist the firm.
Since 1955, when an airliner was brought down over Colorado by a bomb in a suitcase, the U.S. has made little real progress toward countering such threats. 
How long does it take the United States to counter a threat to commercial aviation?
In the case of a bomb stowed in luggage in the belly of an airliner, the answer is nearly half a century.
And counting.
Since a man placed a bomb in his mother's suitcase in 1955 and blew up a United Airlines flight over Colorado, more than two dozen fatal explosions have been recorded on aircraft around the world.
Despite ample evidence that airliners are vulnerable to bombings, U.S. officials have made only halting progress in countering the explosives threat.
Today, only a small percentage of passenger luggage on domestic flights is screened for explosives.
While European airports plan to have some form of mechanical screening of all checked luggage in place by the end of next year, all airports in the United States are not scheduled to do the same until 2017.
The government so far has paid for just 142 of an estimated 2,000 machines needed to cover all of the nation's airports.
Even after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, the few explosive detection machines in airports remain woefully underused, government inspectors have found.
Congress now wants to speed deployment of the medical-style CT scanning machines, which provide the best method for detecting explosives.
In its version of aviation security legislation, the Senate called upon the Federal Aviation Administration to set goals and report back annually.
In a rival bill, the House on Thursday asked for a deadline of Dec. 31, 2003, for installation of the machines.
Bombs in checked bags are, of course, just one threat among many that air travelers face.
But how U.S. officials have handled the threat provides a case study in the go-slow approach that, until now, has characterized efforts to improve aviation security.
Those urging faster action have been stymied, time and again, by views propounded by the airline industry and accepted by the government: that the threat of a bomb on a domestic airliner is relatively small and that a society that prizes convenience and economy should not be held hostage by costly and time-consuming security checks.
U.S. officials historically have responded to aviation disasters by proposing flurries of security measures, only to roll back many of them when airlines objected and the public's focus on the issue waned.
Even after a bomb exploded in the baggage hold of Pan Am Flight 103 in December 1988, claiming 270 lives, reforms were measured, at best.
The government proposed expanded baggage safety checks, but airlines objected that the checks would take too long and the government backed down.
More recently, some airlines and airports have resisted using state-of-the-art, Lincoln Continental-size, $1-million explosive detection machines.
Although the government pays for the machines, airlines and some airports have complained they are too slow, too expensive to maintain, even too ugly.
At a time when aviation security in this country is at an all-time high, security experts remain concerned that airliners still are vulnerable to bombings and that attention to the issue must not be allowed to wane.
"I'm sick and tired of body counts before we get motivated to do something," said Larry C. Johnson, former deputy director of the State Department's office of counter-terrorism for transportation.
"We don't need to have any more people die to know that the security measures in place now are not enough to prevent a person from putting a bomb aboard a plane."
The threat of explosives in luggage was first demonstrated in the United States in 1955 when 44 people on a United Airlines plane died over Colorado so that a man who planted the time bomb could collect on the $37,000 insurance policy of his mother, who was aboard.
John Graham was executed for the crime.
But it was not until 30 years later that the U.S. government moved to tighten cargo hold security.
That initial push was provided by the June 1985 plunge into the sea of an Air India flight near Ireland as the result of a powerful explosion in its cargo hold and the hijacking the next month of TWA Flight 847 from Athens.
The FAA ordered U.S. air carriers to tighten security at major airports in other countries.
And U.S. air carriers overseas were under FAA orders to match every piece of luggage with every passenger to defeat the possibility that a terrorist might check a suitcase containing a bomb, then not take the flight.
To make the policy work, though, airlines had to be willing to delay their flights to remove and search by hand any unaccompanied bags.
Pan American World Airways was in too much of a hurry for that.
It systematically violated the new rules.
Government records show that Pan Am's top security official told subordinates that the FAA had informally given permission to skip laborious bag matches and hand searches.
Instead, he said all bags should simply be X-rayed, even those transferred from other airlines.
This way Pan Am would not have to wait, even if a bag showed up but the passenger to whom it belonged did not. "
In the event of a no-show interline passenger and his bag is load ed in the belly of the plane we go!!!!
" he wrote to Pan Am workers.
The flaw in Pan Am's decision became all too apparent when Flight 103 was blown out of the sky over Lockerbie, Scotland.
The rudimentary X-ray machine could not reliably spot the kind of plastic explosives--hidden in an unaccompanied bag--that brought down that airliner.
In the investigation that followed, the FAA denied ever having given Pan Am permission to skip hand searches.
The presidential commission assigned to investigate the tragedy condemned "a pattern of complacency at both Pan Am and the FAA."
The commission recommended a slew of changes in air security, including a requirement that no unaccompanied bags be allowed on flights.
The international civil aviation organization, which operates under the auspices of the United Nations, adopted that standard, as did the FAA, applying it to U.S. airlines' international flights.
But the U.S. airline industry strongly opposed "bag matching" on domestic flights.
Airline executives argued that the chances of a bomb being planted were remote and that the practice would lead to widespread delays--as baggage handlers would be forced to wade into the cargo holds of fully loaded planes to pull off the bags of any missing passengers.
And it would not prevent bombings by terrorists willing to get on a plane they were about to blow up.
The FAA decided not to have airlines match bags with passengers on all domestic flights.
Instead, the agency encouraged development of a machine capable of detecting small amounts of explosives in luggage.
The search for a better machine became long and protracted.
The FAA decided that the device needed to be easy to operate, and yet so technologically sophisticated that it would assure that even small and well-hidden quantities of explosives would be found.
Meanwhile, U.S. officials had no comprehensive strategy to keep explosives in checked baggage from getting on planes.
European civil aviation authorities, in the wake of the Pan Am explosion, required airlines to match all bags with passengers on domestic and international flights.
But Europe also turned to machines.
Rather than waiting until the perfect machine could be developed, member states were urged to employ whatever technology was available and to upgrade as better solutions became available.
The result is that Europe is way ahead of the United States--very close to achieving a goal of 100%, relatively high-grade mechanical screening of checked bags by the end of next year, security industry executives said.
Before the House acted Thursday, U.S. plans were to require 100% screening of checked bags at some airports by 2009 and at all airports by 2017, the executives said.
The bill the House passed Thursday, moving up the deadline to Dec. 31, 2003, still has to be squared with a Senate version of the aviation security bill that sets no specific deadline.
Under the arrangement favored by the House, airlines would be required to "bag match" until the machines are in place.
Ofer Einav, former security director for Israel's national airline, El Al, said in an interview that he believes U.S. airlines had pushed for perfection in the machines as part of a strategy to avoid bag matching.
Because a superior, mechanical screening system was under development, he said, they could argue that it made no sense to require them to adopt the more onerous, comprehensive bag-matching approach in the meantime.
A key premise of the go-slow approach was that domestic airlines were not significantly threatened by bombings.
But signs were accumulating that this was wishful thinking.
In 1993, a truck bomb placed by terrorists went off at the World Trade Center.
The next year, a man who was later convicted in that attack, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, was arrested.
His laptop computer contained plans to blow up 12 United, Delta and Northwest flights originating in East Asia and bound for the United States.
When TWA Flight 800 exploded shortly after leaving New York's JFK Airport in July 1996, the U.S. government finally was jolted into action.
Speculation abounded that the explosion was the work of terrorists.
Although the crash turned out to have been caused by a fuel tank malfunction, a presidential commission already had been impaneled to recommend security fixes.
Aware that full deployment of bomb detection machines still was a far-off promise, the new commission headed by then Vice President Al Gore recommended that airlines match at least some bags to some passengers on domestic flights--those selected at random by computer or because of some behavior, such as purchasing one-way tickets in cash.
Many aviation security specialists derided the system, which singled out from 2% to 5% of passengers.
"Leaving a computer system as the only method of identifying a possible terrorist is myopic," San Francisco airport security director Mark Denari said.
But over the next few years, all of the major airlines voluntarily went along with the approach--to a degree--as the FAA worked on a formal rule.
The catch was that the airlines wanted to make the checks only on the first legs of a domestic flight.
A passenger selected as suspicious could defeat the system simply by getting off a plane he intended to blow up at an intermediate stop.
The Air Transport Assn., which represents all the major carriers, told the FAA in writing in 1999 that continuing to match bags at intermediate stops was "not possible" because it would lead to "unacceptable delays" at airport hubs or transfer points.
To justify its position, the FAA did a cost-benefit analysis that showed that one plane blowing up would justify 10 years' worth of increased costs to the industry.
The agency figured that the partial bag matches it desired would cost the airlines about $2 billion, mainly in delays.
For comparison purposes, the FAA calculated the cost of losing an entire airliner.
First, it valued each traveler's life at $2.7 million.
Then, it figured the loss if terrorists blew up a typical plane--a Boeing 737, two-thirds full with 73 passengers and five crew members.
Their deaths would cost a total of about $210 million in liability losses.
The airplane itself would mean $16 million more, the agency said.
Miscellaneous property damage, investigative and legal costs would bring the total to $271 million.
Even that huge loss might not justify spending $2 billion on advanced bag checks, humanitarian concerns aside.
But the agency then cited a study showing that people are less willing to fly for about nine months after a major air disaster.
The agency figured that a loss of business of that magnitude would cost $1.7 billion.
Thus, the cost of the enhanced security measures would cost about the same as losing an airliner, the FAA concluded.
Its rule requiring partial bag matching continued to limp through the federal bureaucracy.
Two years later it still has not been issued.
The partial bag matching was seen by the FAA as an interim step, pending availability of enough explosive detection machines to do the job.
Industry and government experts have calculated that it will take about 2,000 of these machines--at about $1 million apiece--to screen every checked bag in the United States.
San Francisco's airport alone figures it needs 35 of the devices.
But at the moment, seven years after the machines were certified by the FAA as technically sound, only 142 have been deployed nationwide.
Congress and the airlines have said they are committed to installing the machines, but for years have found ways to delay the process.
At the Gore commission's urging, Congress appropriated some funds, but those have been whittled away or used for other security-related technologies, including hundreds of special cloth wipes that detect explosives in trace amounts.
The government also has turned to bomb-sniffing dogs.
Los Angeles International Airport has more of the dogs than any other facility, an LAX spokesman said.
Explosive detection machines have been installed at all of the busiest airports, including LAX, which had two more installed Thursday night and now has at least one at each terminal.
But the majority of U.S. airports have none.
A few of the scanners are sitting in warehouses because the FAA says it has no money to install them.
In some cases, floors would have to be retrofitted to handle the equipment because of its tremendous size and weight.
Airports say that another challenge is finding space for the machines, particularly in crowded, behind-the-scenes baggage handling areas.
Even where the machines have been installed, many are not being used to full capacity.
Rather than screen as many bags as possible, some airlines merely have run through the luggage of the 2% to 5% of passengers selected for scrutiny by airline reservations computers.
Some machines were screening fewer than 100 bags a day as recently as last summer, instead of the 200 an hour they are capable of processing, the Department of Transportation's inspector general found.
Some of the machines also have been used cavalierly.
The inspector general's office found that, before Sept. 11, some operators were not even bothering to investigate alarms signaling the possible presence of explosives in suitcases.
Although airlines get the machines free, they have to pay to maintain and operate them and have not always been willing to do so.
When officials at Chicago's Midway Airport were redesigning a terminal for Southwest Airlines in the late 1990s, they were granted government funds to install the machines as part of a new baggage conveyor, said Robert Monetti, who became an aviation security expert and consultant after losing a son aboard Pan Am Flight 103.
But Southwest balked because it did not want to pay to operate the machines and was concerned that the machines would slow down baggage handlers, Monetti said.
A Southwest spokesman confirmed that the airline did not want the machines but said this was only because of concerns that they were unreliable.
At any rate, the machines never were installed.
There have even been concerns that the machines are not pretty enough.
"At one major airport," Inspector General Kenneth Mead told Congress in October, "the airport operator would not approve a lobby installation because the machine did not fit the lobby's color scheme."
Mead did not identify the airport.
But a security executive familiar with the situation identified it as Washington's Reagan National and said the operator relented when informed that the manufacturer did not do custom painting.
Since Sept. 11, security procedures and airline attitudes have changed rapidly.
Dave Ridley, vice president for ground operations at Southwest Airlines, said that the FAA told the carrier to scrap bag matching and begin hand searching the checked baggage of passengers selected by their reservations computers.
Airlines also were ordered to increase the number of passengers searched, either at random or using computer profiling.
Airlines with access to explosive detection machines were exempted from the hand search requirements.
This suddenly made the machines a lot more attractive to the airlines--preferable to the time-consuming and potentially embarrassing hand searches, which have been conducted at makeshift areas next to ticketing counters.
Ridley said Southwest now is "trying to get" the scanning machines.
He said the company only has access to machines--mainly shared with other airlines--at six of the 59 airports it serves.
Since Sept. 11, the FAA also began to more meaningfully address the possibility that people who do not check suitcases might be carrying bombs.
Airlines have been told to have their reservations computers profile passengers who have only carry-on luggage for hand searches and pat-downs at boarding gates.
Treatment: D.C. health officials, in a shift, are prescribing doxycycline, another antibiotic that is cheaper and as effective against anthrax.
Public health officials, gaining a better understanding of the medical challenge posed by proliferating cases of exposure to anthrax spores, have begun changing their approach to treating people at risk of infection. 
On Saturday, the District of Columbia's Department of Health started prescribing a cheaper antibiotic, doxycycline, rather than Cipro--the medicine it dispensed to more than 10,000 people last week.
Those eligible for the drugs include postal workers and corporate mail room workers who may have handled mail tainted with anthrax spores. 
The Supreme Court justices are among those taking the cheaper drug, said Dr. Ivan Walks, the district's chief health officer.
Test results received Friday showed anthrax spores in an air filter at the court's off-site mail screening center. 
Anthrax spores were detected in yet another post office in New Jersey on Saturday.
And hazardous material teams continued to comb congressional office buildings after traces of the bacteria were discovered in the offices of three House lawmakers. 
Until now, Cipro has been the drug of choice for those exposed to the bacteria because it is effective on strains of anthrax that are resistant to doxycycline.
But tests on the anthrax spores in a letter to Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle (D-S.D.) have proved susceptible to both drugs. 
"We know now without a doubt that this particular bug is sensitive to doxycycline," Walks said.
"Why would we keep people on the big gun Cipro , which has more side effects, when we can use a just-as-effective antibiotic that people can tolerate better?" 
Cipro's side effects include nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, skin rashes and nerve damage.
Cipro can also cause organ damage when taken with other prescription drugs, such as warfarin (Coumadin), which is used to prevent blood clots. 
Cipro, made by Bayer Corp., is also much more expensive than doxycycline, a generic drug made by many different firms.
At pharmacies, 500-milligram Cipro pills cost about $5 each, while 100-milligram doxycycline costs about 60 cents per tablet. 
Public health authorities recommend that people exposed to anthrax take either drug twice a day for 60 days. 
"Now that we know that this strain is responsive equally to both, we're encouraging people to go on doxy because it's much less expensive and equally effective," said CDC spokeswoman Lisa Swenarski. 
"Certainly now that we're talking about increasing numbers of people that are going on antibiotics, you have to look at questions of cost and supply." 
The Department of Health and Human Services has contracts to buy 100 million Cipro tablets from Bayer at 95 cents each.
The government is also buying 1.2 billion tablets of doxycycline from Ivax Pharmaceuticals Inc.; terms have not been disclosed. 
A third post office in New Jersey was closed Saturday after traces of anthrax were found in a mail container, said Gerry Kreienkamp, a spokesman for the U.S. Postal Service.
The main post office in Princeton is about 10 miles northeast of the area where anthrax-laced letters to Daschle, NBC News anchor Tom Brokaw and the New York Post were postmarked. 
On Capitol Hill, officials said the trace amounts of anthrax found Friday in offices of Reps. John Elias Baldacci (D-Maine), Rush D. Holt (D-N.J.) and Mike Pence (R-Ind.)
posed little risk. 
Still, Dr. Gregory Martin, chief of infectious diseases at the Bethesda Naval Medical Center, said that everyone who has worked in or visited the offices since Oct. 12 is being provided with antibiotics. 
The findings caused concern because previous anthrax discoveries had been limited to sections of the Hart Senate Office Building, where the Daschle letter was opened, and the mail room in the Ford House Office Building.
The new contamination sites are on the 6th and 7th floors of the Longworth House Office Building. 
Congressional officials who notified Holt told him that the anthrax trace did not suggest his office had received an anthrax-tainted letter, but that it may have received something that had brushed up against a contaminated letter. 
"We are assuming it was cross-contamination," said one senior House aide. 
The discovery also slows Congress' struggle to return to business as usual.
Two of the six congressional office buildings remained closed, and Holt said, "I've told my staff we should put aside our hopes of getting back in on Monday." 
Meanwhile, the second of two Washington postal workers who died of anthrax was buried.
Funeral services took place Saturday for Joseph Curseen Jr., of Clinton, Md., who worked in Washington's Brentwood processing facility.
Capitol: Anthrax scare means cramped, shared quarters and patched systems.
But members vow to carry on their anti-terror agenda.
You could tell Congress was back in session Tuesday because the Senate was in a partisan fight over judges. 
Other than that, though, it was hardly business as usual.
An anthrax scare chased the House and Senate out of town last week, followed by derisive headlines such as the one in the New York Post that pictured House leaders under a headline that said, "Wimps." 
So Tuesday, with six large House and Senate office buildings still closed for testing for the deadly bacteria, lawmakers tried to show their pluck under fire. 
Improvisation--and coziness--were the routine.
Sen. Charles Hagel (R-Neb.) reviewed papers on the hood of his car.
Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.) stuffed more than a dozen of her staff into a 12-by-20-foot cubbyhole--with just two phones--in the Capitol basement.
And some male senators suffered through the indignity of working out of a room known as the First Lady's Waiting Room. 
"This is my office," said Dan Maffei, a Democratic staff member for the House Ways and Means Committee, pointing to his backpack.
Congress conducted its business out of briefcases and by cell phone and e-mail. 
A heavily guarded Capitol remained off limits to tourists Tuesday, eight days after an anthrax-contaminated letter turned up in the office of Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle (D-S.D.).
A closed-circuit TV channel in the Capitol gave anthrax updates while playing soothing dentist-office-type music.
Officials talked about burning piles of mail as a further precaution.
And a defiant Congress sought to carry on its post-Sept.
11 agenda of passing anti-terrorism legislation. 
Officials reported Tuesday that they found no additional traces of anthrax on Capitol Hill and planned to reopen one of the Senate office buildings that was closed last week.
Of about 5,000 nasal swabs of congressional staff members, the number who tested positive for anthrax exposure remained at 28.
They are taking antibiotics. 
"We have been assured that the Capitol is safe," said Senate Minority Leader Trent Lott (R-Miss.).
"We're going to continue to do our work here." 
Daschle, commenting on the deaths of two Washington, D.C., postal workers who had inhaled anthrax, said that, while lawmakers were saddened by the loss of lives, "we're resolved not to allow it to stop the democratic process or this republic, and we're going to continue every bit as determined to carry out our functions as best we can.
" 
California's Democratic senators, Barbara Boxer and Feinstein, and their staffs were among those working out of private hideaways inside the Capitol. 
"It's cramped," said Boxer aide David Sandretti.
"But we're getting work done." 
House members, normally housed in three large buildings, were each given two small temporary offices on two floors of the General Accounting Office building. 
Each lawmaker, however, was limited to one laptop computer, two phones, no more than three staffers--and one box of pencils. 
Not everyone wanted to use the makeshift facilities.
Aides to Rep. Mary Bono (R-Palm Springs) worked out of her suburban Virginia house.
A Bono aide said they didn't see a need to use the temporary office because calls to their Capitol office were forwarded to Palm Springs, and most staff members have cell phones and home computers. 
Still, the need for a central meeting place became evident when a number of congressional hearings were announced at still-undetermined locations. 
Lott said he was having trouble tracking down senators to whom he needed to talk. 
"I was scrambling around the Capitol building trying to find their offices," he said. 
But noting that the troops abroad and postal workers at home are facing difficult circumstances, he added, "I'm not going to complain." 
Some senators hoped to return to their offices soon, perhaps as early as today.
But the Hart Senate Office Building, where the anthrax-contaminated letter to Daschle was found, could remain closed for weeks for decontamination, some officials said. 
Daschle said it is possible that some mail will have to be destroyed.
He asked those who had written to lawmakers to "bear with us." 
Feinstein, whose office is in the Hart building, said that she is dispatching about 10 Washington staff members to California to conduct business. 
"I'm asking people to please communicate through our California office," she said. 
Sen. Evan Bayh (D-Ind.) tried to cope with the events with a sense of humor.
If some of the offices open today, he said he would be willing to double up, even if his roommate is a Republican--all in the name of bipartisanship.
By Associated Press DETROIT -- Steve Yzerman and Luc Robitaille each had two goals and an assist as the Detroit Red Wings beat the Minnesota Wild 8-3 on Friday night.
Each player also reached a milestone, as Yzerman got the 650th goal of his NHL career, and Robitaille collected his 601st and 602nd, moving him past Jari Kurri into 12th on the all-time list.
Yzerman scored a power-play goal and a short-handed goal in the second period to help break open a 1-0 contest.
Robitaille scored a power-play goal in the second period and another at even strength in the third which stymied a Minnesota comeback attempt.
Detroit's Brett Hull picked up two assists to reach 1,200 points for his career.
The Red Wings have the NHL's best record at 16-3-0-1, and the Wild are 7-8-3-1.
It was the most goals given up by Minnesota in its two-season history.
Red Wing goaltender Manny Legace made 17 saves and is unbeaten in his last 17 decisions.
Nicklas Lidstrom also scored in the second period for Detroit.
Minnesota got goals from Richard Park, Aaron Gavey and Andrew Brunette in the first 9:04 of the third period, but Robitaille tipped in a Chris Chelios shot from the point at 13:40 to make the score 6-3.
Brendan Shanahan and Boyd Devereaux added goals for the final margin.
Notes:@
The Wild signed center Jim Dowd to a two-year contract extension. ...
Scratched for Minnesota were forwards Matt Johnson, Roman Simicek and defenseman Nick Schultz. ...
Red Wing scratches were defenseman Max Kuznetsov (hip pointer) and forward Brent Gilchrist.
Regime says they will not comply without evidence against Bin Laden.
United Arab Emirates cut diplomatic ties with Taliban government. 
Afghanistan's ruling Taliban rejected President Bush's ultimatum Friday, vowing to continue to protect Osama bin Laden and his terrorist followers even if that provokes a war and the destruction of the regime.
Word of the Taliban's refusal to comply with Bush's blunt demands came from the regime's ambassador to Pakistan, who said there is no evidence linking Bin Laden and his Al Qaeda organization to the suicide hijackings that destroyed the World Trade Center, damaged the Pentagon and killed more than 6,000 people.
"If there is no evidence and proof, we're not prepared to give up Osama bin Laden," Abdul Salam Zaeef told a press conference in Islamabad, Pakistan's capital.
The United Arab Emirates today cut diplomatic relations with Afghanistan's ruling Taliban movement, the official UAE news agency WAM reported.
The news agency said the nation decided on the move after trying to persuade the Taliban government to hand over Bin Laden.
The UAE's action leaves only two nations--Saudia Arabia and Pakistan--that recognize the Taliban as the government of Afghanistan, and those ties are strained.
Bin Laden is an exiled Saudi, and ties with Pakistan are at the breaking point because Pakistani President Gen. Pervez Musharraf decided to support the United States against the Taliban, which controls about 95% of Afghan territory.
On Friday, White House Press Secretary Ari Fleischer brushed aside the Taliban's rejection.
"The president's message to the Taliban today is the same message that he gave last night, that there will be no negotiations and no discussions.
He expects the Taliban to honor the demands that he made in his speech last night, to cease their efforts to support and harbor terrorists and to turn terrorists over to the United States or other authorities."
Asked if Bush rejected the Taliban's response, Fleischer replied: "That's a fair characterization."
The Taliban's information ministry said today its forces had shot down a helicopter belonging to the opposition Northern Alliance--not a pilotless U.S. plane as originally reported.
In an interview, the Afghan consul-general in Peshawar, Najibullah, said he had spoken to Afghans who saw a craft shot down.
He said the aircraft was downed by a Soviet-made surface-to-air missile.
The Taliban are known to have more than 200 Soviet-era SAMs, in addition to more than 100 U.S.-made Stinger missiles.
The refusal to surrender Bin Laden came in the face of a blunt warning from the president in his speech Thursday: "The Taliban must act and act immediately.
They will hand over the terrorists or they will share in their fate."
Bush did not detail the evidence against Bin Laden, asserting that "Al Qaeda is to terror what the Mafia is to crime."
But U.S. officials have said the evidence is overwhelming that Bin Laden was the mastermind behind the worst act of terrorism on U.S. soil.
Zaeef also said Taliban authorities have rejected a compromise suggested by a council of 1,000 Islamic clerics that Bin Laden be encouraged to leave Afghanistan voluntarily.
He said the proposal was not binding on the regime and will be ignored.
Nevertheless, the Frontier Post, a newspaper based in Peshawar, Pakistan, reported Friday that Bin Laden had traveled to Wakhan, an Afghan town near the border with China.
The newspaper's account--which could not be confirmed independently--said Bin Laden's movements were in response to the clerical council.
Meanwhile, Bush and Secretary of State Colin L. Powell continued to recruit foreign governments for an ideologically diverse global coalition in which abhorrence of terrorism is the only requirement for membership.
On Friday, China signed up despite years of political friction resulting from Washington's criticism of China's human rights record.
Powell said the administration expects China to supply intelligence on Bin Laden's activities and to help Washington locate and freeze his fiscal assets.
Powell said it is unlikely that China will be asked to participate in military action against the Taliban.
Bush made no public comments during the day.
He spoke by telephone with the leaders of three countries with large Muslim populations--Turkey, Oman and Nigeria--to thank them for expressions of support and condolence.
He also scheduled visits next week with the leaders of Canada and Japan, all part of his effort to develop as broad a coalition as possible.
The president spent about 20 minutes Friday with Chinese Foreign Minister Tang Jiaxuan, who had spent more than two hours with Powell earlier in the day.
White House spokesman Sean McCormick said Bush's trip to China next month remains on schedule.
"Both sides have already started our cooperation on the anti-terrorism field, and such cooperation will continue into the future," Tang said as he left the State Department.
"We firmly oppose and strongly condemn all forms of terrorism in all their evil acts."
At the end of the day, Bush left for Camp David, giving a thumbs-up salute from the door of the Marine One helicopter to several hundred White House staffers who had turned out on the White House driveway in a flag-waving show of support.
In his Thursday night speech, Bush seemed to broaden the administration's objectives, saying that after U.S. forces finished with Al Qaeda, they would take on "every terrorist group of global reach."
But on Friday, a senior administration official said that Bush's formula covers only truly global organizations--a qualification that apparently leaves out local terrorist groups such as the Irish Republican Army and perhaps even anti-Israel organizations such as Hamas and Hezbollah.
"It's Al Qaeda plus those who harbor them, first," the official said.
"I don't think there was ever, frankly, much disagreement that we were going to have to do something very focused."
The official said the debate within the administration determined that local terror groups are deplorable but that "global terrorism . . .
was the threat."
Meanwhile, the State Department began clearing away some of the diplomatic undergrowth inhibiting participation in the coalition by Pakistan, perhaps the most important country in the world when it comes to dealing with the Taliban.
On Thursday and Friday, department officials informed members of Congress that the administration was moving to ease sanctions against Pakistan and India that were imposed after the South Asian rivals exploded nuclear devices.
A State Department official said the sanctions probably will be softened sometime next week.
In 1998, the Clinton administration blocked U.S. economic and military assistance to Pakistan and India, along with military and high-technology sales and U.S. support for World Bank loans.
In 1999, additional sanctions were applied to Pakistan after Musharraf led a military coup that ousted an elected government.
Musharraf remains president.
Musharraf has already pledged full support for U.S. anti-terrorism efforts, but removal of some sanctions will help him explain his stand to a restive public.
In London, Foreign Secretary Jack Straw announced that he will fly to Iran next week to attempt to enlist the Tehran regime in the anti-terrorism alliance.
It will be the first visit to Iran by a British foreign secretary since the Islamic Revolution there in 1979.
Iranian President Mohammad Khatami has condemned the attacks with hijacked airliners, but Iran's support for retaliation is uncertain and Britain has been working to bring it on board.
Prime Minister Tony Blair spoke with Khatami on Thursday and Straw spoke with Iranian Foreign Minister Kamal Kharrazi on Sunday.
"The president and the government of Iran have been powerful in their opposition to the Taliban," Straw said.
In Moscow, Russian President Vladimir V. Putin gave the strongest signal yet that Russia will play a part in the war on terrorism.
"We are ready to cooperate with the U.S. in fighting terrorism in the widest possible sense," Putin said in an interview with the German ARD network from his vacation home in the southern Russian city of Sochi.
"We have not received any specific requests as of yet, but the special services have been cooperating for a long time already.
The question is how to bring this cooperation to a qualitatively new level.
We are ready to do that."
In Washington, Powell urged the Organization of American States to activate a two-year-old Western Hemisphere Committee Against Terrorism.
"We have this tool," Powell told a special meeting of OAS foreign ministers.
"We need it.
We must use it."
The organization has already invoked the Rio pact, a Cold War-era treaty that asserts that an attack on one hemispheric country is an attack on all.
On Friday, the foreign ministers approved two resolutions, one highlighting the "terrorist threat to the Americas" and
the other intended to strengthen cooperation "to prevent, combat and eliminate terrorism.
"
"Twenty-nine out of the 34 nations represented here today have citizens who were lost in the World Trade Center bombing last week," Powell said.
"Truly this attack against one of us was an attack against all of us."   
Kempster reported from Washington and Marshall reported from Islamabad.
Times staff writers James Gerstenzang and Jim Mann in Washington, Marjorie Miller in London and Maura Reynolds in Moscow contributed to this report.
Facilities: Lalas and Sampras attend groundbreaking for Carson complex, which MLS sees as a showcase.
On a day heavy on hyperbole, it was left to Alexi Lalas to deliver some light relief.
"I can't feel anything below my waist right now after that ride," the Galaxy defender said after he and Pete Sampras stepped down from a bulldozer that had jostled and bumped them across a short stretch of the campus at Cal State Dominguez Hills.
Tuesday's occasion was the groundbreaking ceremony for the Anschutz Entertainment Group's $120-million sports complex that will begin rising today from the dirt clods of what were once the flower fields of Carson.
It was a hot morning, and while Sampras sported a golf--sorry, tennis--shirt and slacks, Lalas was uncomfortably warm in a suit.
"I want to thank my new friend, Pete Sampras," Lalas said.
"I called him last night and said, 'Hey, is this like a really formal gig?'
He said, 'Oh, everyone's gonna be there; you've gotta wear a suit and tie.'
He's got a really good sense of humor."
While civic, university and sports leaders praised the project and its anticipated benefits, it was Don Garber, Major League Soccer's commissioner, who provided the only real news of the day.
The Galaxy, he said, will host the MLS championship game in 2003 and the league's All-Star game in 2004 at its new 27,000-seat stadium, the centerpiece of the 85-acre sports complex.
The stadium will take 15 months to complete and is scheduled to open on June 1, 2003, according to Tim Leiweke, AEG's president.
"The Galaxy will become much more of an international team now," he said.
"We're going to bring in world-class teams to play against the Galaxy and, in turn, get the Galaxy out on the road to play against them.
So the branding of the Galaxy is going to be more international."
Adjacent to the soccer stadium will be a 13,000-seat tennis stadium.
Scheduled to open July 1, 2003, this will be the home of the Pete Sampras Tennis Academy and, possibly, the site of several significant tournaments.
"Maybe one day we can get a pro tournament here," Sampras said.
"I see Bob Kramer over there in the audience , who runs the men's tournament at UCLA.
Maybe one day we can get the tournament here."
Or perhaps an even bigger one.
"I really hope so," Sampras said.
"The players love playing in L.A., I can tell you that, talking to all the top players in the world.
It would be a shame not to get a big tournament here."
Sampras said he had moved from California to Florida as a teenager simply to find a better training facility and stronger practice opponents.
Future players won't have to do that, he said.
"When this thing gets built, people will see a see a lot of pros they can practice against," he said.
"People on the West Coast are going to come here.
Once you have the environment, we'll have a central thing here in L.A."
I look forward to spending a lot of time here and helping the young guys play the sport."
A new Olympic velodrome for cycling and a track and field facility also will be built, but it is soccer that is the main focus of the sports complex.
The site will serve as the national training center for nine of U.S. Soccer's 10 national teams, starting in August 2003.
The defending world champion women's national team probably will train and play games in Carson before leaving for the fourth Women's World Cup, in China in September 2003.
Dan Flynn, U.S. Soccer's secretary general, said the only exception for now will be the under-17 men's national team, which will remain in residency camp in Bradenton, Fla., until expiration of the USSF's current contract with that facility.
Leiweke said the nation's second soccer-specific stadium, after the one built by Lamar Hunt in Columbus, Ohio, "will put soccer in this country on the map."
The fact that AEG is in talks with "a few" NFL teams, including the San Diego Chargers, interested in using the site for their summer training camp, will not shift the focus of the complex, Leiweke said.
"At the end of the day, this is about soccer," he said.
"We have never had a world-class soccer facility in this country and, no offense against Columbus, but we needed to get a true European-style stadium here where the fans can be intimately involved in the game, with a roof to keep the noise in.
"That's why soccer does so well in Europe , because fans do make a difference in this game....
We've never had that here.
We're going to have that now.
Instead of playing to 80,000 empty seats, we're going to have a packed house almost every night
and it's going to be a wonderful environment."
Staff Writer Lisa Dillman contributed to this report.
E-SHARIF --
The U.S.-backed northern alliance wrests control of this key northern city on Friday in its first major victory against the Taliban.
The fall of Mazar-e-Sharif turns into a rout in the northern half of the country, as the Taliban retreat Saturday and Sunday toward the south and the capital, Kabul.
The Taliban religious army also abandons this major city in the northwest during its flight southward.
The opposition captures this northern city on Sunday.
Located between Mazar-e-Sharif and Taloqan, Kunduz appears to be the only sizable northern city still held by the Taliban.
The opposition reaches the outskirts of the capital early in the week, prompting the Taliban early Tuesday to begin a quiet withdrawal to their southern strongholds.
Taliban losses accelerate Wednesday as anti-Taliban Pashtun forces gain control of this important eastern city near Pakistan.
Tribal elders take control of this town 60 miles south of Kabul and there are unconfirmed reports of anti-Taliban uprisings in the southern provinces of Ghazni and Wardak.
The birthplace of the Taliban and the only large city in Afghanistan still under their control.
However, unconfirmed reports Wednesday indicate fighting in the streets with control of the airport in question.
We prefer to use electronic artwork because it is easier to work with and it improves the quality of figures on the printed page.
This is intended to be a simplified guide. 
We can accept: floppy, cd-rom, jaz, zip and optical (128 mb disks).
Macintosh or PC formatted.
Currently, production-quality artwork CANNOT be submitted online. 
We prefer photographic images at 400+ DPI TIFF or Photoshop v5 format (at actual size).
We can accept: JPG, EPS, DCS 1 2 . Full guide to preparing production-quality artwork Preferred file formats and resolutions.
Tips and hints How to get your file into the right format.
Nature Macmillan Publishers Ltd 2000
Registered No. 785998 England.
Nature Macmillan Publishers Ltd.
Nature is constantly reviewing the content that it offers online, and as part of that review we have decided to retire feature of the week .
From time to time when papers of exceptional interest are published we will continue to feature these articles in a similar fashion.
The archive of past features, which covers an impressive array of science published in Nature , will continue to be freely available.
The Genome Gateway - free access to all genome sequencing research, news and analysis.
Nature Cancer Update -
Our online news service covering all aspects of cancer research.
The Physics Portal - Nature's virtual home for physicists.
Nature Science Update - daily and freely available research reports from the Nature news service. 
Greenhouse gases warm the planet by reflecting heat back to earth, while aerosols keep it cool by bouncing radiation back into space.
This balance is already being upset by anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions, and now Mark Jacobson argues in this week's issue that we are compounding the problem with emissions of black carbon (soot).
Black carbon reduces the reflectivity of aerosols and as such may be the second most potent agent of global warming after carbon dioxide (11 February 2001).
T HAT the stamens are the male organ of the flower, forming unitedly what the older writers called the "and cium, is a fact familiar not only to the scientific man, but to the ordinary observer.
The earlier botanists formed the natural conclusion that the stamens and pistil in a flower are intended mutually to play the part of male and female organs to one another.
Sprengel was the first to point out, about the year 1790, that in many plants the arrangement of the organs is such, that this mutual interchange of offices in the same flower is impossible; and more recently, Hildebrand in Germany, and Darwin in England, have investigated the very important part played by insects in ther fertilisation of the pistil of one individual by the stamens of another individual of the same species.
It is now generally admitted by botanists that cross-fertilisation is the rule rather than the exception.
The various contrivances for ensuring it, to which Mr. Darwin has especially called the attention of botanists, are most beautiful, and interesting; and the field thus opened out is one which, from its extent, importance, and interest, will amply repay the investigation of future observers.
For this cross-fertilisation to take place, however, some foreign agency like that of insects is evidently necessary, for conveying the pollen from one flower to another.
The question naturally occurs, How then is fertilisation accomplished in those plants which flower habitually in the winter, when the number of insects that can assist in it is at all events very small?
I venture to offer the following notes as a sequel to Mr. Darwin's observations, and as illustrating a point which has not been elucidated by any investigations that have yet been recorded.
I do not here refer to those flowers of which, in mild seasons, stray half-starved specimens may be found in December or January, and of which we are favoured with lists every year in the corners of newspapers, as evidence of "the extraordinary mildness of the season.
I wish to call attention exclusively to those plants, of which we have a few in this country, whose normal time of flowering is almost the depth of winter, like the hazel-nut Corylus avellana , the butcher's broom Ruscus aculeatus , and the gorse Ulex europ us ; and to that more numerous class which flower and fructify all through the year, almost regardless of season or temperature; among which may be mentioned the white and red dead-nettles Lamium album and purpureum , the Veronica Buxbaumii , the daisy, dandelion, and groundsel, the common spurge Euphorbia peplus , the shepherd's purse, and some others.
During the winter of 1868-69, I had the opportunity of making some observations on this class of plants; the result being that I found that, as a general rule, fertilisation, or at all events the discharge of the pollen by the anthers, takes place in the bud before the flower is opened, thus ensuring self-fertilisation under the most favourable circumstances, with complete protection from the weather, assisted, no doubt, by that rise of temperature which is known to take place in certain plants at the time of flowering.
The dissection of a flower of Lamium album ( Fig.
A ) gathered the last week in December, showed the stamens completely curved down and brought almost into contact with the bifid stigma, the pollen being at that time freely discharged from the anthers.
A more complete contrivance for self-fertilisation than is here presented would be impossible.
The same phenomena were observed in Veronica Buxhaumii , where the anthers are almost in contact with the stigma before the opening of the flower, which occurs but seldom, V. agrestis and polita , the larger periwinkle Vinca major , the gorse, dandelion, groundsel, daisy, shepherd's purse, in which the four longer stamens appear to discharge their pollen in the bud, the two shorter ones not till a later period, Lamium purpureum , Cardamine hirsuta , and the chickweed Stellaria media , in which the flowers open only under the influence of bright sunshine.
In nearly all these cases, abundance of fully-formed, feedbearing capsules were observed in thc specimens examined, all the observations being made between the 28th of December and the 20th of January. 
In contrast with these was also examined a number of wild plants which had been tempted by the mild January to put forth a few wretched flowers at a very abnormal season, including the charlock Sinapis arvenis , wild thyme Thymus serpyllum , and fumitory Fumaria officinalis ; in all of which instances was there not only no pollen discharged before the opening of the flower, but no seed was observed to be formed.
An untimely specimen of the common garden bean Faba vulgaris , presented altogether different phenomena from its relative the gorse, the anthers not discharging their pollen till after the opening of the flower; and the same was observed in the case of the Lamium Galeobdolon or yellow archangel ( Fig. B ) gathered in April, notwithstanding its consanguinity to the dead-nettle. 
Another beautiful contrast to this arrangement is afforded by those plants which, though natives of warmer climates, continue to flower in our gardens in the depth of winter.
An example of this class is furnished by the common yellow jasmine, Jasminium nudiflorum , from China, which does not discharge its pollen till considerably after the opening of the flower, and which never fructifies in this country.
But a more striking instance is found in the "allspice tree, the Chimonanthus fragrans , or Calycanthus praecos of gardners, a native of Japan, which, flowering soon after Christmas, has yet the most perfect contrivance to prevent self-fertilisation ( Fig. C ).
In a manner very similar to that which has been described in the case of Parnassia palustris , * the stamens, at first nearly horizontal, afterwards lengthen out, and rising up perpendicularly, completely cover up the pistil, and then discharge their pollen outwardly, so that none can possibly fall on the stigma.
As a necessary consequence, fruit is never produced in this country; but may we not conjecture that in its native climate the Chimonanthus is abundantly cross-fertilised by the agency of insects, attracted by its delicious scent, in a similar manner to our Grass of Parnassus? 
Early stage of flower, calyx and corolla removed.
Later stage, stames surrounding the pistil, and discharging their pollen outwardly. 
The description detailed above cannot of course apply to those winter-flowering plants in which the male and female organs are produced on different flowers; but here we find commonly another provision for ensuring fertilisation.
In the case of the hazel-nut the female flowers number from two to eight or ten in a bunch, each flower containing only a single ovule destined to ripen.
To each bunch of female flowers belongs at least one catkin (often two or three) of male flowers, consisting of from 90 to 120 flowers, and each flower containing from three to eight anthers.
The pollen is not discharged till the stigmas are fully developed, and the number of pollen-grains must be many thousand times in excess of what would be required were each grain to take effect.
The arrangement in catkins also favours the scattering of the pollen by the least breath of wind, the reason probably why so many of the timber-trees in temperate climates, many of them flowering very early in the season, have their male inflorescence in this form.
The Euphorbias or spurges have flowers structurally unisexual, but which, for physiological purposes, may be regarded as bisexual, a single female being enclosed along with a large number of male flowers in a common envelope of involucral glands.
Two species are commonly found flowering in the winter, and producing abundance of capsules, E. peplus and helioscopia.
In both these species the pistil makes its appearance above the involucral glands considerably earlier than the bulk of the stamens ( Fig. D ). 
A single one, however, of these latter organs was observed to protrude beyond the glands simultaneously, or nearly so, with the pistil, and to discharge its pollen freely on the stigmas, thus illustrating a kind of quasi-self-fertilisation.
The remaining stamens do not discharge their pollen till a considerably later period, after the capsule belonging to the same set has attained a considerable size.
In E. helioscopia the capsules are always entirely included within the cup-shaped bracts, and the stigmas are turned up at the extremity so as to receive the pollen freely from their own stamens.
Now contrast with this the structure of E. amygdaloides , which does not flower before April ( Fig. E ).
The heads of flowers which first open are entirely male, containing no female flower; in the hermaphrodite heads, which open subsequently, the stigmas are completly exposed beyond the involucral glands long before any stamens protrude from the same glands.
Here, therefore, complete cross-fertilisation takes place, the pollen from the first-opened male heads no doubt fertilising the stigma from the next-opened hermaphrodite heads, and so on.
In this species the bracts are not cup-shaped, but nearly flat; the stigmas hang out very much farther than in E. helioscopia ; and the styles are perfectly straight. 
The above observations are very imperfect as a series, and I can only offer them as a contribution towards an investigation of the laws which govern the cross-fertilisation of self-fertilisation of winterflowering plants.
On communicating some of them to Mr. Darwin, he suggested that the self-fertilised flowers of Lamium album , and other similar plants, may possibly correspond to the well-known imperfect self-fertilised flowers of Oxalis and Viola ; and that the flowers produced in the summer are cross-fertilised; a suggestion which I believe will be found correct.
In conclusion, I may make two observations.
The time of flowering of our common plants given in our textbooks is lamentably inexact; for the hazel, March and April for instance! and for the white deadnettle, May and June!
according to Babington.
Great care also should be taken to examine the flowers the moment they are brought indoors; as the heat of the room will often cause the anthers to discharge their pollen in an incredibly short space of time.
This is especially the case with the grasses. 
* Journal of the Linnaean Society for 1868-69, Botany, p. 24. 
Nature Macmillan Publishers Ltd 1869
Registered No. 785998 England.
Authors want to publish more, readers want to read less.
This law, which paraphrases the fact that wide exposure is paramount to authors, and (pre)selection to readers, means that anything which allows this law to be better fulfilled will inevitably prompt change in the roles of the many players in scientific publishing.
This debate has focused on how information technology will spur innovation in scientific communication among researchers.
However, research information is but the tail of a much larger dog: the needs of the higher education system.
We predict that the research tail is unlikely to wag the dog of higher education, but conversely that the electronic needs of the higher education system will be the major determinant of the evolution of any system of research information.
Indeed, it is often overlooked that the same technologies that are the focus of intense debate in the research community are simultaneously revolutionizing the higher education system.
They will prompt a shift from the current system, where the supply of information is 'pushed' towards students, to one where students will 'pull' from increasingly sophisticated, and customized resources.
This means that universities and other organizations involved in higher education will themselves increasingly need to develop comprehensive publishing and archiving activities to serve all their clients: authors, readers, students, teachers and researchers. 
The overall information output of higher education institutions probably exceeds their pure research information output by an order of magnitude, and we therefore predict that it is the broader needs of higher education that will be the major determinant in the evolution of information systems for researchers.
The need to integrate information for both the purposes of research and higher education suggests that institutions themselves will increasingly usurp the traditional role of publishers in the generation of scientific information, and opt to 'self-archive' their output (see also Harnad , this debate).
This is already happening.
Dspace, a joint project of MIT Libraries and the Hewlett-Packard Company, is designed to archive locally the intellectual output of MIT faculty and researchers: some 10,000 articles annually.
The power of information technology is not so much its utility to empower authors to increase the visibility of their work, or readers to search archives of information.
Its main disruptive power is that it is spurring a transition in publishing from a low volume/high margin business, to a high volume/low margin business, and an integration of research and educational material, a long-desired, but until now, an unattainable goal.
The need for universities to generate educational information means that it is logical to bring publishing facilities in-house, and as this includes research output, higher education institutions themselves are bound to become increasingly important platforms in the scholarly publishing chain.
At the same time, this development will provide innovative publishers with new and interesting opportunities in a much larger and lucrative market. 
The evolution of a distributed system, where information is shared, therefore seems inevitable, with rewards being given to those actors, including publishers, who add real value to the information available.
The role of publishers may be increasingly that of aggregators, or providing peer review and other quality control services to higher education institutions, tailored not just to researchers, but also to a much wider audience including students, teachers and the public. 
The PLS initiative and Berners-Lee s semantic web give little attention to the need for quality control.
Peer review has its weaknesses but it is a powerful quality control phase in scientific communication.
Under the current system, it is publishers that mainly administer this system.
Future systems will probably maintain an element of the 'brands' which act as a guide to quality in the current journals system, but will incorporate broader assessments at both the disciplinary and multidisciplinary levels.
Peer review, in some form, will no doubt be conserved in any future systems.
A publication system dominated by institutions publishing their intellectual outputs on their own archives will generate a global distributed system: a virtual organization with cross-searches of geographically dispersed archives.
If this happens, one question is: will publishers, whether commercial or not-for-profit, and other intermediaries, be able to add sufficient value to maintain a position in this new value chain.
The challenge is to all parties concerned!
The University of Twente has established in 1999 the DINKEL Institute (Development Institute for Knowledge, Education and Learning, Peter Daalmans, Acting Director) with the aim to provide integrated services for educational innovation, teaching support and scientific information provision.
This has been achieved by integrating its university library, educational development centre, university press and appropriate ICT departments into one organizational unit.
Authors want to publish more, readers want to read less.
This law, which paraphrases the fact that wide exposure is paramount to authors, and (pre)selection to readers, means that anything which allows this law to be better fulfilled will inevitably prompt change in the roles of the many players in scientific publishing.
This debate has focused on how information technology will spur innovation in scientific communication among researchers.
However, research information is but the tail of a much larger dog: the needs of the higher education system.
We predict that the research tail is unlikely to wag the dog of higher education, but conversely that the electronic needs of the higher education system will be the major determinant of the evolution of any system of research information.
Indeed, it is often overlooked that the same technologies that are the focus of intense debate in the research community are simultaneously revolutionizing the higher education system.
They will prompt a shift from the current system, where the supply of information is 'pushed' towards students, to one where students will 'pull' from increasingly sophisticated, and customized resources.
This means that universities and other organizations involved in higher education will themselves increasingly need to develop comprehensive publishing and archiving activities to serve all their clients: authors, readers, students, teachers and researchers. 
The overall information output of higher education institutions probably exceeds their pure research information output by an order of magnitude, and we therefore predict that it is the broader needs of higher education that will be the major determinant in the evolution of information systems for researchers.
The need to integrate information for both the purposes of research and higher education suggests that institutions themselves will increasingly usurp the traditional role of publishers in the generation of scientific information, and opt to 'self-archive' their output (see also Harnad , this debate).
This is already happening.
Dspace, a joint project of MIT Libraries and the Hewlett-Packard Company, is designed to archive locally the intellectual output of MIT faculty and researchers: some 10,000 articles annually.
The power of information technology is not so much its utility to empower authors to increase the visibility of their work, or readers to search archives of information.
Its main disruptive power is that it is spurring a transition in publishing from a low volume/high margin business, to a high volume/low margin business, and an integration of research and educational material, a long-desired, but until now, an unattainable goal.
The need for universities to generate educational information means that it is logical to bring publishing facilities in-house, and as this includes research output, higher education institutions themselves are bound to become increasingly important platforms in the scholarly publishing chain.
At the same time, this development will provide innovative publishers with new and interesting opportunities in a much larger and lucrative market. 
The evolution of a distributed system, where information is shared, therefore seems inevitable, with rewards being given to those actors, including publishers, who add real value to the information available.
The role of publishers may be increasingly that of aggregators, or providing peer review and other quality control services to higher education institutions, tailored not just to researchers, but also to a much wider audience including students, teachers and the public. 
The PLS initiative and Berners-Lee s semantic web give little attention to the need for quality control.
Peer review has its weaknesses but it is a powerful quality control phase in scientific communication.
Under the current system, it is publishers that mainly administer this system.
Future systems will probably maintain an element of the 'brands' which act as a guide to quality in the current journals system, but will incorporate broader assessments at both the disciplinary and multidisciplinary levels.
Peer review, in some form, will no doubt be conserved in any future systems.
A publication system dominated by institutions publishing their intellectual outputs on their own archives will generate a global distributed system: a virtual organization with cross-searches of geographically dispersed archives.
If this happens, one question is: will publishers, whether commercial or not-for-profit, and other intermediaries, be able to add sufficient value to maintain a position in this new value chain.
The challenge is to all parties concerned!
The University of Twente has established in 1999 the DINKEL Institute (Development Institute for Knowledge, Education and Learning, Peter Daalmans, Acting Director) with the aim to provide integrated services for educational innovation, teaching support and scientific information provision.
This has been achieved by integrating its university library, educational development centre, university press and appropriate ICT departments into one organizational unit.
Earliest life or rare dirt?
Gloves are coming off in ancient bacteria bust-up.
A claim to have found evidence of the oldest living things on Earth is being fiercely contested.
The argument looks set to run and run, and no one may win, but it may lead to a better understanding of the origins of life on our planet.
The debate is academic, but its implications are not.
The 'fossil bacteria' in question are around 3.5 billion years old.
That's roughly one billion years older than the only confirmed fossil bacteria.
This would mean that complex biochemistry - including photosynthesis - originated around one billion years after the Earth formed.
Photosynthesis released oxygen into the atmosphere, which has supported the majority of life ever since.
Dark microscopic squiggles in rocks called 'Apex chert' from Western Australia, are the fossils of various species of cyanobacteria, according to William Schopf of the University of California, Los Angeles 1 .
A team led by Martin Brasier at the University of Oxford, UK, believes that Schopf's 'fossils', although unusual, are simply tiny clumps of impurities in the rock 2 .
Fellow researchers are loath to be named for fear of "exacerbating what looks like becoming an acrimonious debate", according to one.
They are nonetheless following the details closely.
"This is a fascinating debate," says another.
Most agree that the age of the Apex chert rocks may preclude either side ever being proved right.
Schopf's team studied the structure and chemical composition of the squiggles with a technique called laser-Raman imagery.
The group argues that the marks are made up of carbon molecules, which are the decay products of living bacterial cells.
"They are tiny little fossils," says Schopf.
Brasier's team repeated some of Schopf's analyses recently and disagrees.
"Schopf's hypothesis is deeply flawed," Brasier says.
Brasier's team agrees that the marks' chemical composition appears biological in origin.
But the group thinks that they actually arose through unusual geological processes around ancient hydrothermal vents, where hot volcanic gases rise to the surface.
What's more, the group says, the squiggles look nothing like other ancient microbes.
"The shapes are far too complicated to be bacteria," says Brasier, who feels Schopf should drop his claim.
Brasier's group asserts that biological-seeming molecules can result from reactions between the carbon dioxide and monoxide released by hot, metal-rich hydrothermal vents.
These molecules could then have been sculpted into bacteria-esque filaments as the hot rocks they were born in cooled.
If this was the case, argues Schopf, such material would be found everywhere.
So far it hasn't been. "
The facts are going to win and I've got the data," he says.
Win-win?
The one thing both parties agree on is that only time will tell.
Schopf is continuing to analyse his putative fossils.
A nanoscale examination of their 'cell membranes' will, he claims, prove beyond doubt that the Apex chert does contain the oldest known remains of life on Earth.
Brasier and his team are now investigating the kind of chemical reactions that they believe produced the squiggles.
The researchers suspect the reactions could themselves have created complex molecules such as amino acids and be the source of life on Earth. "
Schopf may have stumbled on a site that may explain how life got started," says Brasier.
November 11, 2001 --
The Red Cross is offering to refund money to donors seeing red over the charity's spending decisions. 
"We don't want to keep funds from people who contributed with one thing in mind and find that it's being spent on another thing," said Dolores Swirin, chief of fund-raising for the Greater New York chapter. 
Some 3,000 people have called and e-mailed the American Red Cross in the last 10 days, demanding explanations of how the half-billion dollars raised by the charity after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks are being spent, said spokesman Bill Blaul. 
Swirin tells local callers that the Red Cross is helping workers at ground zero, evacuated residents, people who lost jobs or income, and others seeking counseling. 
Some funds will be held for "long-term needs," some to pay the charity's expenses, and some will be reserved for "future attacks," she said.
By SUSAN EDELMAN November 11, 2001 -- The Red Cross admits it has a black eye, but vows to repair its tarnished image and "make America proud." 
The embattled charity is defending its controversial plan to withhold millions of dollars in Sept. 11 donations for future terrorist attacks, but promises a top-to-bottom review of its performance "to see how we can do better." 
"We're a patient and very, very strong organization, and we're going to make America proud," said spokesman Bill Blaul. 
The 120-year-old charity - one of the most trusted and respected in the world - has come under harsh attack for deciding to reserve nearly half of the $564 million it has raised through its Liberty Fund. 
Critics say the policy betrays the spirit in which the money was collected. 
"They played on the heels of Sept. 11 to get people to open their hearts and wallets," said Rep. Bart Stupak, a Michigan Democrat who sits on a House subcommittee that last week began a review of charitable fund-raising connected to Sept. 11. 
"I've heard a lot from donors, and they're angry.
People feel like they've been hoodwinked." 
The course chosen by the Red Cross has created a public-relations nightmare that could end up, at worst, with lawmakers stripping the organization of its federal charter. 
"If Congress got really upset, just abolish 'em," said Stupak, adding, "No one wants it to come to that.
" 
State Attorney General Eliot Spitzer has also threatened action against the Red Cross, saying donors intended their money for Sept. 11 victims - not for future victims of unspecified attacks. 
The small print of one advertisement for the Liberty Fund said the money was "for this tragedy and the emerging needs from this event." 
"We are waiting to see whether the Red Cross is going to follow the will of the American people," Spitzer's spokesman Scott Brown said. 
If the charity does not change its plans, Spitzer could sue it for "deceptive advertising" or other violations, officials said. 
State Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver (D-Manhattan) said any suggestion by the Red Cross that it won't honor its original fund-raising promise was "outrageous." 
But the Red Cross appears ready to ride out the storm, with Blaul calling critics "shortsighted.
" 
"God forbid there's a truck bombing in Albany next week," he said. 
"The American Red Cross has to be prepared, and anything less in this environment is playing a risky game.
" 
The charity is pleading its case on several fronts.
It has put information on its Web site, www.redcross.org, about how donations are being spent, including one posting outlining "myths and facts." 
Blaul says one of the biggest misconceptions is the Red Cross is using Sept. 11 money to build its empire. 
About 9 cents of each dollar will go for overhead costs, such as transportation, housing and food for volunteers, hot lines for victims, computers and phone lines for relief workers, and auditing services to keep track of the avalanche of donations, he said. 
The charity is also using its public-relations staff - and some Sept. 11 victims - to plug its successes. 
A grateful James Choe, whose dry-cleaning business in TriBeCa was closed for weeks after the attacks, was recruited when he called to thank the Red Cross for the $1,850 it gave him to pay for rent on his house, buy groceries and pay other bills. 
"They called me the next day and asked me if I was comfortable talking about it," Choe said.
By LAUREN BARACK November 17, 2001 -- It appears Walter Hewlett is not the kind of man to let things go. 
The son of Hewlett-Packard founder William Hewlett filed papers early Friday with the Securities and Exchange Commission stating he plans to solicit proxies to fight the company's merger with computer-maker Compaq. 
Also participating are Hewlett's two sisters, the family's William R. Hewlett Revocable Trust, and Edwin van Bronkhorst, former Hewlett-Packard CFO, and a former trustee of the David and Lucile Packard Foundation. 
The proposed merger, announced in September by Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina, started a war of sentiment as members of Hewlett and Packard families both came out against the union of the two companies. 
First the Hewlett family, which controls 5.5 percent of the voting shares, and then David Packard, who controls 1.3 percent, announced they would oppose the deal. 
But the heavy-hitter among the group is the Packard Foundation, which controls 10.4 percent of the voting shares, and has yet to say how they will vote. 
David Packard willed his estate to the foundation when he died in March 1996. 
The institute holds the small voting shares now in his son's hands. 
A representative for Hewlett said the board member filed with the S.E.C., primarily to give other shareholders access to the information he had used to oppose the merger. 
"As of now he hasn't made any decision on what course he will take," said the source.
"He's not sure if he will file a proxy fight." 
According to S.E.C. rules when a board member or company insider chooses to share written company information, they must make a public filing so that all shareholders can see it. 
However, the Packard foundation has commissioned its own analysis report from Booz, Allen and Hamilton, which it expects to have by December or early January.
But how the group will vote is still unclear.
Less than a week into the baseball season, Yankee fans aren't lamenting Roger Clemens' hand injury or debating Joe Torre's lineup.
They are complaining about the cable TV business.
Three million customers in the nation's largest sports market have not been able to see the Yankees on television because the team's new cable network cannot reach agreement with the area's biggest cable company.
The dispute is enraging Yankee fans who are customers of Cablevision.
At WFAN, the all-sports radio station, more callers have been talking about "premium-tier" prices than upper-deck home runs.
"We even made a joke on the air this morning:
Maybe we can get a couple of calls about the game,"' program director Mark Chernoff says.
The new YES Network, owned mostly by George Steinbrenner and his partners, insists on being carried as a basic cable channel, which would probably mean a $2 monthly increase for Cablevision customers.
Cablevision insists on selling YES as a premium channel like HBO, charging considerably more .
$8 to $12 . but only of those who sign up for it.
Because of the impasse, fans stand to miss 130 games this year, YES is losing $5.5 million a month in potential income, and Cablevision is losing customers to satellite TV.
Cablevision's stock has plummeted to a three-year low, trading at around $28 Thursday, compared with a 52-week high of $71.
Despite pleas from fans, politicians and Yankee players .
including centerfielder Bernie Williams, a Cablevision customer .
the battle seems to be at a stalemate, with no talks scheduled.
Each side claims to be standing up for the middle-income TV watcher.
"There are a lot of nice people in the Bronx and Brooklyn who are entitled to see the Yankees at a reasonable price," YES chairman Leo Hindery says.
Cablevision spokesman Bill Powers counters: "We do not believe all our customers should receive a Yankees rate increase for programming they may not want to watch."
The longer the stalemate lasts, the better for DirecTV, the satellite TV service that carries the 130-game Yankee package from YES.
It is the only alternative for Cablevision customers who want Yankee games .
though it is not an option available to apartment dwellers.
"I hate the hassle of switching, but I get the feeling this isn't going to be over soon," says Gus Jackman of Scarsdale, checking out the DirecTV package at the local Radio Shack.
"I was feeling frustrated and powerless when I realized I really wasn't going to see the games."
DirecTV sign-ups in Cablevision territory jumped 20 percent in March, spokesman Bob Marsocci says.
And that was before any games were actually missed.
"I think a lot of Cablevision customers assumed that Cablevision and YES would have reached a deal by opening day," he says.
"Well, opening day came and went and Cablevision customers were staring at a blank screen.
We're expecting a lot of new customers this month."
DirecTV ads pepper New York newspapers, radio and television, and the company has sent people door-to-door in Cablevision country, which includes the Bronx and Brooklyn and suburbs in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.
YES itself has run ads urging Cablevision subscribers to switch.
In reaction, Cablevision and the cable industry have run ads emphasizing the roughly 30 Yankee games available on broadcast channels or other cable networks.
As a basic channel, YES would charge Cablevision about $1.85 a month for each customer, or a total of about $70 million a year.
About 30 other cable systems in the region, with 5 million customers, have put YES on basic, and so far most of them have absorbed the cost without passing it on to subscribers.
But Cablevision says it would have to impose a "Yankee rate increase" on all its subscribers if YES were on basic.
Hong Kong stocks slipped on Friday morning despite a sharp rally on Wall Street as domestic economic uncertainties prompted investors to take profits on some stocks they had recently pushed up. 
The benchmark Hang Seng index was down 1.02 percent at 10,415.56 points at 10:58 p.m. EDT. 
"The index has rebounded about 2,000 points since the September 11 attacks.
It's approaching overbought, so there'll be profit-taking," said Ben Kwong, director at KGI Asia. 
China stocks, which have outperformed the broader market since the attacks on New York and Washington, were down as investors said they may have moved up too far to fast. 
Analysts said investors had been throwing their weight behind China technology stocks recently because the mainland is seen as being relatively insulated from international uncertainties. 
The Hang Seng Mainland Composite Index was down 3.21 percent at 1,127.75, but is still up 8.5 percent since the attacks. 
HSBC Holdings, Hong Kong's top bank and a global giant, led gainers with a 0.58 percent climb to HK$86.50, arcing toward an overbought level on its 14-day relative strength index. 
Analysts said investors were buying into selected heavyweights and liquid stocks in the face of global uncertainties. 
But technology stocks slipped although the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite Index had spiked up 4.62 percent. 
Legend Holdings, the mainland's top computer maker, lost 3.36 percent at Hk$3.60 after rising as high as HK$3.85 shortly after market opened. 
Top mainland cellular carriers, China Mobile and China Unicom lost three percent to HK$25.25 and 2.6 percent to HK$9.15 respectively.
China Mobile is the second largest stock on the Hang Seng by market capitalization behind HSBC. 
Investors also may have been taking profits ahead of the weekend in case of another surge in international tensions. 
The FBI warned Americans on Thursday of possible new terror attacks on U.S. soil within the next few days as U.S. forces unleashed their fiercest onslaught yet on Afghanistan. 
Investors are concerned that a protracted war would delay the economic recovery of the United States, Hong Kong's second largest trading partner. 
"The players are still concerned about the economic outlook in the U.S. and in Hong Kong.
The market is now focused on the economy after the policy address," said Kenny Tang, associate director at Tung Tai Securities. 
In his annual address to the legislature on Wednesday, Hong Kong leader Tung Chee-hwa warned of tougher times ahead after last month's attacks on the United States but offered little to kickstart the local economy. 
Market turnover stood at HK$2.64 billion (US$338 million).
Losers led gainers 270 to 81 with 401 stocks unchanged.
Mike Piazza capped one of the most emotional nights in Shea Stadium history by hitting a two-run homer in the bottom of the eighth inning as the New York Mets rallied for a 3-2 win Friday over the faltering Atlanta Braves. 
The first major sports event in New York since the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center drew 41,235 to Shea Stadium, which served as a staging area for rescue workers only a week earlier. 
The crowd roared after a rousing rendition of "God Bless America" by Diana Ross, again after Marc Anthony sang the national anthem and a third time after Mayor Rudolph Giuliani arrived at the ballpark. 
Liza Minnelli again brought the crowd to its feet by performing her trademark "New York, New York" during the seventh-inning stretch.
But nothing compared to the reaction after Piazza sent an 0-1 pitch from Queens native Steve Karsay over the center-field fence to put the Mets ahead for the first time. 
"I really don't know what to say," Piazza said.
"I'm so happy I gave something.
There was a lot of emotion. ...
I'm just so proud to be part of this tonight.
It's so cool. 
"There are so many emotions.
It's really tough to put into perspective.
All I can say is these people are great.
New York has been so strong throughout this. ...
We just want to stay positive.
This is what America is all about -- coming together." 
Both teams exchanged hugs and handshakes before the game, but the emotions were decidedly different at the end as Karsay was ejected following a confrontation with Mets third base coach John Stearns at the end of the eighth inning. 
Piazza's 34th home run made a winner of closer Armando Benitez , who gave up a go-ahead RBI double to Brian Jordan in the top of the eighth but worked around a leadoff walk in the ninth, retiring Keith Lockhart on a game-ending double play. 
More importantly, the blast lifted New York within 4 1/2 games of first-place Atlanta in the National League East.
The Philadelphia Phillies are just one-half game behind the Braves, who have lost four of five. 
Brian Hunter's bases-loaded bouncer up the middle in the bottom of the ninth inning gave the surging Philadelphia Phillies a 1-0 victory Friday over the visiting Florida Marlins. 
Marlon Anderson -- who nearly dropped a pop-up that ended the top of the inning -- led off with a single and raced to third on a single by Pat Burrell off Vladimir Nunez . 
Travis Lee was intentionally walked to load the bases and pinch hitter Felipe Crespo's fly to right field was too short to score Anderson.
But with the infield drawn in, Hunter bounced a 2-1 pitch over Nunez's head and into the outfield. 
The hit was just the sixth for Philadelphia and made a winner of Jose Mesa , who worked into and out of trouble in the top half. 
The Phillies won the first three games of their four-game set with Atlanta and had a chance to reclaim first place in the National League East Division but dropped the series finale, ending their five-game winning streak. 
Philadelphia notched its 23rd one-run win and moved within one game of first-place Atlanta, which has won nine consecutive division titles. 
The National League wild card chase may be tight, but Albert Pujols of the St. Louis Cardinals continues to make the NL Rookie of the Year race a landslide. 
Pujols capped his second five-RBI game of the week with a grand slam in the top of the ninth inning, giving the visiting Cardinals their eighth straight win, 9-5 over the reeling Pittsburgh Pirates. 
A virtual lock as the NL's top rookie, Pujols is showing no signs of slowing down as the season draws to a close.
He drove in a career-high five runs Tuesday and matched that figure Friday while tying an NL rookie record with his 82nd extra-base hit.
With the score tied, 5-5, former Cardinal Omar Olivares came on to start the ninth.
He surrendered a leadoff single to Miguel Cairo, who was sacrificed to second by Craig Paquette.
Placido Polanco singled to shallow right field and J.D. Drew walked before Pujols lined a 1-1 pitch into the left-field bleachers. 
It was his first career grand slam, 36th homer of the season and moved him past San Francisco's Barry Bonds into fourth place in the NL with 125 RBI.
It also made a winner of Luther Hackman , who struck out one in a scoreless inning. 
St. Louis moved three games ahead of the Chicago Cubs in the wild card race and has taken 10 of 12 meetings with Pittsburgh this season. 
Computer security companies on Tuesday warned that a dangerous new Internet worm that is spreading will try to delete and overwrite files on infected computers beginning on Wednesday.
The worm, dubbed Klez.
E, is programmed to delete and overwrite Word, Excel, video, image, and Internet files, among others, on the sixth day of every other month, said Mikko Hypponen, manager of antivirus research at F-Secure, a Helsinki-based company.
Klez, now listed as one of the 10 most common viruses worldwide, displays different subject lines, sometimes masquerading as a virus warning, and it tries to delete antivirus software as well, according to F-Secure.
The worm can infect computers running any e-mail system, but only sends itself to recipients listed in the address books of Microsoft Corp.'s MSFT.O Outlook, Hypponen said.
E-mail attachments containing the worm can execute automatically, infecting the system just by a recipient reading or viewing the e-mail message and not opening the attachment, the company said.
The original version of the worm was first discovered in Nov. 2001, but earlier versions were not as destructive or fast spreading as Klez.
E, Hypponen said.
The Klez variants appear to have been written by someone in Southeast Asia, as they contain messages such as: "made in Asia," "I want a good job, I must support my parents," and "I want a salary of $5,500 a month," according to F-Secure.
"I think it's a real guy who would like to get a job," said Hypponen.
"He might think (writing the worm) is proof that he can program."
E-mail service provider Central Command Inc. said it has detected infections of the worm in more than 97 countries.
"We have seen a significant peak in confirmed infections over the last 30 days of Worm/Klez.
E, over this period it has been our top infector," said Steven Sundermeier, product manager for Central Command.
Most major antivirus vendors' products can detect and block the virus, Hypponen said.
"We haven't gotten a single report from corporate customers" of infection, he said, adding that Trend Micro has the worm rated as a "low" risk.
A company that specializes in data recovery said it is still unclear whether files overwritten by the worm can ever be recovered.
"This virus is unique.
It's the first I've seen where it actually overwrites the content of the file as opposed to just deleting it," like the Love Bug virus in 2000 did, said Jim Reinert, director of software products at Ontrack Data International Inc. of Eden Prairie, Minnesota.
Deleted files are easier to recover because all that is destroyed is a reference to the data, leaving the data itself somewhere on the computer, whereas overwriting files obscures the data, he said.
Microsoft Corp.
MSFT.O on Friday pushed back the launch of its XBox video game console by a week and backed away from its initial shipment targets, leaving U.S. retailers and game publishers expecting about half as many units when the XBox makes its delayed debut on Nov. 15. 
The decision to delay the much-anticipated launch of the next-generation game platform from Nov. 8 to Nov. 15 was made in the past week, said Robbie Bach, Microsoft's' chief XBox officer, citing a recent review of the company's preparations. 
Microsoft still plans to ship between 1 million and 1.5 million units to retailers by the end of the calendar year, but would not provide a forecast for the first batch of shipments. 
"We've just moved on to not focusing on the day-one number," Bach said. 
The XBox represents Microsoft's push into the $20-billion video game industry, now dominated by Japan's Sony Corp. 6758.T and Nintendo Co Ltd.
7974.OS , both of which have competing 128-bit game consoles. 
Analysts scaled back forecasts for initial sales of XBox, but some praised the delay as prudent given the uncertainty surrounding consumer sales for the crucial holiday period. 
Retailers and game publishers remained upbeat about prospects for the XBox.
But rivals said Microsoft made a misstep, creating an opening for the PlayStation 2 and Nintendo's upcoming GameCube. 
Analysts, retailers, and game publishers said the number of XBox consoles available on the launch day would be around 300,000 -- about half of Microsoft's initial target of between 600,000 and 800,000. 
"I'm now assuming that they'll have 300,000 (units) at launch," said Michael Wallace, a UBS Warburg analyst, who cut his forecast for the year-end to 500,000 to one million units. 
Brendan Barnicle of Pacific Crest Securities said by reducing its initial shipments, Microsoft should also cut related costs, helping its bottom line. 
"They're trying to figure out what's going to happen with consumer confidence," he said. 
Sony Corp. 6758.T , which had its own problems with shipping shortfalls when PlayStation 2 premiered last year, called Microsoft's announcement a "rookie move.
" 
"I'm not exactly sure what one week is going to buy them," a Sony spokeswoman said.
"I think there are clear indications they're not ready for this launch." 
Peter Main, Nintendo of America executive vice president of sales and marketing, said the news was "nothing short of catastrophic" for game retailers, who began to hear of the reduced launch shipments last Friday. 
Main said many retailers have asked Nintendo for more GameCube consoles, scheduled to debut the same week as the XBox, to make up for the shortfall. 
"I'm going to push hard to steal every additional piece I can get from Japan," he said, adding that it was not clear if he could get more than the 700,000 units Nintendo has already allocated for its U.S. launch on Nov. 18. 
"We'll be able to replenish the North American market at a rate of over 100,000 units a week," Bach said. 
Microsoft plans to have 15 to 20 games available at launch for the $299 console, and 30 by the end of the year.
Among the more notable titles expected at or around launch are "WWF: RAW Is WAR," "Dave Mirra Freestyle BMX 2," and "NFL Fever 2002." 
Microsoft was evaluating titles for any material that might be considered offensive in light of the attacks on New York and the Washington, Bach said, in line with steps other video game publishers have already announced. 
"Generally, what you see in the marketplace is people doing what's appropriate...and we will do the same," he said. 
In late August, Microsoft delayed the launch of the XBox in Japan to Feb. 22 of next year in order to concentrate resources and available units in North America.
The software giant has said it will spend about $500 million marketing the XBox in the United States. 
The game console, one of Microsoft's only forays into hardware manufacturing, has been dogged by rumors about its availability and launch date for months. 
That concern has weighed on related stocks, such as Santa Clara, California-based NVIDIA Corp. , which closed down 1.9 percent Friday and 28.8 percent for the week.
NVIDIA is making the primary graphics chip for XBox. 
Microsoft's major partners with the XBox rallied behind the company on Friday, including retailers Toys R Us Inc. and Electronics Boutique Holdings Corp. , and game publisher THQ Inc. 
"Microsoft has recognized that the road to success is more of a marathon than a sprint," said Peter Moore, president of Sega of America, which will make games for XBox. 
The video game industry had expected a banner holiday season thanks to the XBox and GameCube launches and new titles for Sony's PlayStation 2.
But some analysts were ratcheting back those expectations after the attacks on New York and Washington and expectations of a U.S. recession. 
Shares in Microsoft closed down 2.1 percent at $49.71 on the Nasdaq on Friday. 
Barry Bonds hit his 73rd run and set the a major league record for slugging percentage as the San Francisco Giants completed the season with a 2-1 victory over the Los Angeles Dodgers on Sunday. 
After sitting out Saturday, Bonds faced knuckleballer Dennis Springer with two outs in the first inning.
The three-time Most Valuable Player was just 1-for-7 lifetime against Springer before sending a 3-2 pitch over the right-field fence for his record home run and a 1-0 lead. 
Bonds singled in the third inning, popped out in the sixth and flied out in his final at-bat in the eighth.
He finished with an .863 slugging percentage, bettering the mark of .847 set by Hall of Famer Babe Ruth in 1920. 
The 37-year-old Bonds also walked 177 times, seven more than the record that Ruth set in 1923. 
Mark Gardner struck out one in a perfect seventh inning for the win as San Francisco completed its second straight 90-win season. 
In St. Louis, the Houston Astros have home-field advantage throughout the postseason. 
Shane Reynolds' 100th career win may have been his most important as he pitched the Astros to a 9-2 victory over the St. Louis Cardinals that clinched the Central Division title and the top playoff seed in the National League. 
Reynolds held the Cardinals to one run -- a solo homer by J.D. Drew -- and eight hits in 7 1/3 innings.
He walked none and struck out one. 
Matched up against former team mate Darryl Kile, Reynolds became just the seventh pitcher to win 100 games with the Astros.
But Sunday's victory carried with it the luxury of avoiding the Arizona Diamondbacks' 1-2 punch of Randy Johnson and Curt Schilling in the best-of-five Division Series. 
Instead, the Astros will face the NL East champion Atlanta Braves. 
St. Louis needed to win two of three games this weekend to secure the division title.
But the Cardinals settled for the wild card berth and will face Johnson and Arizona in Game One of the Division Series Tuesday. 
In Atlanta, the Braves became the first team in major league history to win a division with a losing record at home, suffering a season-ending 4-2 loss to the Florida Marlins. 
Atlanta, which clinched its 10th straight division title on Friday, finished 40-41 at Turner Field.
The Braves had a 48-33 mark on the road. 
Despite its struggles at home, Atlanta finished three games ahead of the Philadelphia Phillies in the National League East.
But the Braves failed to reach 90 wins in a full season for the first time since 1990. 
It marked the final game for Florida manager Tony Perez, who will move into the team's front office next season. 
"We got all the pitchers in that we needed to get in and all the hitters some at-bats, which is good," Braves manager Bobby Cox. "
Physically, we're ready to go." 
In Chicago, Sammy Sosa continued to make history as his Chicago Cubs suffered a season-ending 4-3 loss to the Pittsburgh Pirates. 
Sosa belted his 64th homer of the season and the 450th of his career, a solo shot in the eighth inning off Mike Lincoln, to break a pair of total base records and complete one of the most spectacular four-year stretches in baseball annals. 
With 425 total bases this season, the outfielder surpassed the Chicago record of 423 -- set by Hack Wilson in 1930.
His 1,619 total bases over the past four seasons are two more than Chuck Klein, who set the National League four-year mark from 1929-32 while with the Philadelphia Phillies. 
By also driving in a run with a first-inning single, Sosa finished the campaign with 160 RBI, becoming the first National Leaguer to collect at least 160 since Klein had 170 in 1930. 
Sosa hit 66 homers and drove in 158 runs three seasons ago in his famed home run battle with St. Louis' Mark McGwire.
This year, he also led the NL with 146 runs. 
In Cincinnati, Pat Burrell homered and drove in three runs as the Philadelphia Phillies posted a 4-1 victory over the Cincinnati Reds. 
Randy Wolf allowed seven hits while walking one and striking out eight and has allowed just one earned run in his last three starts.
He was 5-1 in his last seven starts, including two complete games. 
"It was a fun way to go out," Wolf said. 
In Milwaukee, Richie Sexson hit his 45th home run and matched a career high with five RBI, powering Milwaukee to a 15-5 rout of the playoff-bound Arizona Diamondbacks. 
The loss cost the Diamondbacks home-field advantage throughout the postseason. 
Milwaukee's 68-94 record was its worst in 17 years, but Sexson helped the Brewers avoid their first 95-loss season since 1977. 
Rookie Gary Knott surrendered eight unearned runs and seven hits in 3 2/3 innings for the Diamondbacks, the National League West champions who will host the St. Louis Cardinals on Tuesday in Game One of their Division Series. 
In New York, Britt Reames and Mark Smith helped the Montreal Expos end a disappointing season on a positive note. 
Reames pitched 5 2/3 scoreless innings and Smith hit a three-run homer to give the Expos a 5-0 victory over the New York Mets. 
The Expos finished the season in last place with a 68-94 season, the fourth straight year the floundering franchise, which is rumored to be relocating almost yearly, has won less than 70 games. 
It also was a season of disappointment for the Mets , who closed the year with six losses in nine games. 
The defending National League champions won 25 of 30 games before the slide and were eliminated from postseason contention Tuesday.
New York won 94 games a year ago. 
In San Diego, Padre fans said goodbye to one certain Hall of Famer and paid homage to another sure-fire Cooperstown hero. 
Ricky Henderson, the greatest leadoff hitter in baseball history, became the 25th player in major league history to record 3,000 hits with a leadoff double in the bottom of the first inning of the Padres' 14-5 loss to the Colorado Rockies. 
The outcome hardly mattered as the afternoon belonged to the Henderson and 41-year-old Tony Gwynn, retiring after 20 seasons. 
Henderson blooped the first pitch from John Thomson into right field to tie the late Roberto Clemente on the all-time hit list. 
The Padres had a postgame ceremony for Gwynn, also a member of the 3,000-hit club.
who pinch-hit in the ninth. 
The Rockies erased a 3-2 deficit with eight runs in the top of the fourth, highlighted by a pair of two-run homers by Jacob Cruz and Juan Uribe, who also belted a three-run shot in the ninth.
Two people were killed and four others were wounded, all foreigners, when an explosion ripped through an electronics shop in eastern Saudi Arabia, the official Saudi Press Agency (SPA) reported. 
The agency quoted a police spokesman as saying that the explosion occurred at about 8 p.m. local time (1 p.m. EDT) in front of the shop on King Khalid Street, a shopping area, in the city of al-Khobar. 
"Concerned security authorities started investigating the reasons behind the explosion.
Details on the nationalities of the dead and wounded will be issued later," the spokesman said. 
Bush administration officials said they saw no immediate connection between the explosion and Washington's response to the Sept. 11 attacks on New York and Washington. 
"Based on first reports, we believe this is an isolated incident, not related to September 11th.
But we are continuing to collect facts," an administration official told Reuters. 
Khobar was the scene of a truck bomb attack in 1996 that killed 19 U.S. servicemen. 
It was not immediately clear if foreigners were the target of Saturday's explosion. 
An eyewitness in Khobar told Reuters by telephone that he saw one of the victims, possibly a man, covered with a blanket.
He said one hand of one of the victims had been severed by the blast. 
He said that two of the wounded were believed to be Britons and two others were Filipinos. 
An official at the British embassy in Riyadh said they were trying to get more information about the victims. 
Another eyewitness told Reuters that police set up checkpoints on all roads leading to King Khalid street. 
"They appear to be looking for a specific car believed to be involved in the explosion," the witness said.
U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft said on Tuesday suspects potentially linked to Sept. 11 attacks on the United States obtained licenses to transport hazardous materials, and he urged the public to be on alert. 
"Today I can report to you that our investigation has uncovered several individuals, including individuals who may have links to the hijackers, who fraudulently have obtained or attempted to obtain hazardous material transportation licenses," Ashcroft told the U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee. 
"Given the current threat environment, the FBI has advised all law enforcement agencies to remain alert to these threats."
Ashcroft said. 
Nearly 7,000 people have been reported missing or dead after attackers hijacked four commercial airliners on Sept. 11, smashed two into the World Trade Center in New York and another into the Pentagon near Washington.
The fourth plane crashed in rural Pennsylvania. 
Although, the U.S. government lifted a two-day ban on flights by crop-duster planes on Tuesday -- imposed because of concerns the aircraft could be used in chemical or biological weapons attacks -- Ashcroft said the nation must not let its guard down on this or other fronts. 
"And I urge Americans to notify immediately the FBI of any suspicious circumstances that may come to your attention regarding hazardous materials, crop-dusting aircraft or any possible terrorist threat," he said. 
A senior U.S. Justice Department official told reporters about 20 individuals have been charged or arrested in the past two weeks with fraudulently obtaining a commercial license to haul hazardous materials. 
The official said not all 20 were witnesses or wanted for questioning in connection with the investigation into the hijacked plane attacks.
The official said the 20 had used false documents to get the licenses. 
Ashcroft issued his update as he made the case on Capitol Hill for the second time in as many days for Congress to quickly approve new laws proposed by U.S President Bush's administration to help combat terrorism. 
"The American people do not have the luxury of unlimited time in erecting the necessary defenses to future or further terrorist attacks," Ashcroft said.
"Terrorism is a clear and present danger to Americans today.
" 
In the wake of the attacks Ashcroft wants Congress to give law enforcement officers expanded powers to tap telephones, conduct searches, seize assets and detain suspects. 
While there is broad agreement that a number of laws need to be toughened -- such as lifting a five-year statute of limitations on prosecuting crimes of terrorism and formally making it a crime to harbor terrorists -- many legislators fear several of Ashcroft's other proposals would violate civil liberties. 
Critics complain about provisions that would allow indefinite detention, permit searches without notification of the targets and broaden the definition of terrorism to the point where convictions could be made merely on grounds of association rather than any specific activity. 
During a trip to FBI headquarters on Tuesday, Bush defended his administration's anti-terrorism package. 
"Ours is a land that values the constitutional rights of every citizen and we will honor those rights of course," Bush said.
"But we're at war ... and in order to win the war we must make sure the law enforcement men and women have got the tools necessary, within the Constitution, to defeat the enemy." 
Vice President Dick Cheney, during a Capitol Hill luncheon meeting with Senate Republicans, said Congress should aim to pass an anti-terrorism bill by the end of next week, a Republican aide said. 
Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Patrick Leahy, a Vermont Democrat, reaffirmed his vow on Tuesday to work with Ashcroft to craft a package "as soon as possible" that helps crack down on terrorism without infringing on civil liberties. 
"We cannot allow terrorism to prevail by curtailing our constitutional democracy or constricting our freedoms," Leahy said. 
Leahy said, "We are working to be in position without the passage of much time to pass significant legislation containing those consensus items." 
Leahy said he intends to reach out to House Judiciary Committee Chairman James Sensenbrenner, a Wisconsin Republican, to forge a bipartisan accord. 
Sensenbrenner had planned for his committee to report out Ashcroft's proposed measure on Tuesday.
But he postponed consideration for a week following a hearing on Monday where Republicans and Democrats voiced a number of objections. 
On a map, Salt Lake City may not be all that far from Calgary, but for the U.S. Olympic team on Sunday the distance between the two seemed vast and could be measured in gold, silver and bronze.
The U.S. record haul of 34 medals was more than four times the total they took home from the 1988 Winter Games in Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
"We won eight medals in Calgary, and then we asked ourselves, what on earth is wrong?"
Sandra Baldwin, chef of mission for the U.S. Olympic team.
"The great thing that led to this was a very, very carefully executed plan...to help support our athletes and coaches," Baldwin said at a news conference with members of the U.S. team.
Even the 5-2 defeat to arch-rivals Canada in the men's ice hockey final on the last day of the Games could not dampen the mood.
Derek Parra, the world-record-breaking U.S. speedskater who won gold in the 1,500 metres competition on February 19 and a silver in the 5,000 metres, summed up his feelings with a broad smile.
"I think this is an exclamation mark," Parra told reporters.
"There's been this snowball effect, with all the athletes supporting each other."
The U.S. athletes denied that challenges to judging in figure skating and short track skating had overshadowed the Olympics.
Apolo Anton Ohno, who won a controversial gold medal and a silver in short track events, said he was surprised that his championship race was challenged by South Korea, but said it did not faze him.
"I just want to get to that line, look to my left, look to my right and say: 'I'm ready'," Ohno said.
U.S. officials said the smooth operation of the Salt Lake City Olympics could give the United States an edge in applying for the 2012 Summer Games.
The four candidate cities are New York, Washington D.C., Houston and San Francisco, and officials said a decision would be reached in November on which would be chosen.
Thousands of soldiers and rescue workers began cleaning up Taipei's flooded mass transit system on Thursday after Typhoon Nari dumped record amounts of rain on Taiwan and killed at least 80 people. 
The National Fire Administration's disaster response center said 80 people were killed by the storm, which was heading toward Hong Kong on Thursday.
Drowning or landslides caused most casualties, the center said. 
At least 19 people were missing and 208 injured after Nari turned roads in Taipei into torrents of water that flowed past second-story windows at the height of the flooding earlier this week. 
A big clean-up was underway with about 16,000 soldiers armed with shovels and brooms helping.
More than 3,400 people, whose homes were damaged or flooded, remained in shelters. 
Several mass rapid transit (MRT) stations were flooded and the system, parts of which are underground, was expected to be disrupted for weeks or even months.
City officials scrambled to find alternative means of transport for 900,000 commuters who use the system every day. 
More than 2,000 soldiers and workers have been working around the clock to drain the MRT network and officials
said they expected to finish pumping it out by late Friday. 
"About 100 water pumps have joined in the work, and we expect to complete it by the end of Friday," Taipei Mayor Ma Ying-jeou told reporters. 
Two of the five MRT lines were open, one was shut down, while the other two were partly open, said Henry Chen, a spokesman of the state-run Taipei Rapid Transit Corp. 
"After we pump water out of our system, we need to clean up the mud and test our equipment," Chen said.
"There is so much work that needs to be done that it will easily take months to resume full operations." 
Chen said no official estimates for losses were available but the rapid transit corporation's daily revenue was believed to be 80 percent lower than the usual total of about $580,000. 
Taipei's main train station was also under water as were the basement parking lots of scores of buildings in the capital. 
The disaster response center said rail services from Taipei to the southern port city of Kaohsiung would resume on Saturday, but it would take two weeks to resume services to the northern city of Keelung. 
The Central Weather Bureau lifted a three-day storm warning over land on Wednesday.
The typhoon was 170 miles east of Hong Kong, heading west at eight mph on Thursday morning. 
Taiwan's financial markets reopened on Wednesday after staying closed for two days because of the storm. 
Despite investors' worry about the cost of storm damage, the benchmark TAIEX index closed 0.17 percent higher on Wednesday.
By late morning on Thursday it was 2.01 percent lower. 
As of Wednesday, 307,000 households were still without electricity and 524,000 were without water. 
There was still no official estimate for total storm damage but losses were expected to batter the island's economy, already reeling from its worst slowdown in almost three decades. 
The Taiwan Stock Exchange said publicly-listed companies reported a total of $42 million in typhoon-related damage. 
Taiwan's agricultural losses from the storm rose to $60 million as floods inundated about 57,037 acres of farmland, the cabinet's Council of Agriculture said on Thursday. 
In July, Typhoon Toraji -- one of the worst to hit Taiwan -- ripped through the island killing about 200 people and causing more than $173 million in damage. 
Almost 80 percent of new customers have switched from other ISPs, and nearly half of these new customers have switched from AOL, said Bob Visse, director of MSN, in a phone interview. 
In recent months, MSN has made it one of its primary missions to take away market share from No. 1 Internet service provider AOL, which has about 31 million subscribers.
MSN extended its special Internet service offer to new customers as part of its $50 million campaign it started in late May following AOL's move to raise the price of its Internet service to $23.90 from $21.95. 
The offer lets new users sign up for access free for three months and lock in a $21.95 a month rate until Jan. 1, 2003. 
The company had implemented the offer in late May in response to a price hike by rival AOL, which raised the price of its Internet service to $23.90 this summer. 
MSN plans to launch a new version of its software, MSN 7, this fall that will offer expanded high-speed access capabilities. 
The switching campaign "has been one of our most popular offer and most of the people are sticking with it (after the free trial ends," Visse added.
"It's hard to gauge exactly what is going to happen with growth figures based off this summer, which is the slowest but we feel good we have had strong growth during that time frame." 
The company declined to indicate how many of its total subscriber base was comprised of paying subscribers. 
The U.S. Congress appeared ready on Tuesday to let lapse a ban on Internet-specific taxes, as a dispute over states' ability to tax online sales threatened to derail a simple extension of the politically popular moratorium. 
But America's 130 million Internet users will not be hit with new taxes any time soon, representatives of state and local governments said, as state legislatures are not in a taxing mood and only four are even in session. 
The U.S. House of Representatives voted on Tuesday to extend the current ban on online access taxes and other "multiple and discriminatory" Internet taxes for another two years, winning praise from the Bush Administration. 
However, it appeared unlikely that the Senate would take up the issue before the current ban expires on Sunday. 
Congress passed the original ban in 1998 to prevent states and local governments from imposing taxes that might discourage growth of the new medium, which now accounts for somewhat less than 1 percent of all retail sales. 
But with more than half of all Americans now online, many state and local governments worry that their revenues will decrease as residents turn increasingly to the Internet to make purchases. 
A 1992 Supreme Court decision prohibits states from collecting taxes on out-of-state retailers unless they have a physical presence in the state. 
That adds up to $13.3 billion in lost revenues this year, one study says. 
Catalog companies and Internet retailers have long argued it would be nearly impossible to comply with the roughly 7,500 different taxing jurisdictions in the United States alone. 
State governments have sought to simplify their sales-tax codes with the hopes that Congress will allow them to collect taxes on online, catalog and other "remote" sales. 
Proponents, including many "bricks and mortar" retailers, have sought to hitch the effort to the moratorium extension and force Congress to consider both issues under one bill. 
Efforts to combine two issues -- the online sales tax and an extension of the current moratorium -- have proven fruitless. 
Senate Commerce Committee negotiators failed to reach a compromise after 18 months of talks, and House Judiciary Committee Chairman James Sensenbrenner, a Republican from Wisconsin, overruled efforts to consider them jointly in the House last week. 
The bill the House passed by voice vote on Tuesday afternoon simply extended the current moratorium for another two years. 
The Bush Administration said in a release that it supported the bill but would have preferred a five-year extension. 
Sen. Ron Wyden, an Oregon Democrat, said he hoped the Senate would pass an identical measure this week. 
"You can make something happen pretty quick around here, but we still have some persuading to do," Wyden said. 
The Senate Commerce Committee is not scheduled to take up Wyden's two-year bill or competing five-year and nine-month extensions, a committee spokesman said. 
Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle could bypass the Commerce Committee and take the House bill straight to the floor, but Wyden said such a move is unlikely as the Senate has not reached a consensus. 
Representatives from state governments said not much would change if the ban was allowed to expire, but some lawmakers disagreed. 
Rep. Chris Cox, sponsor of the House bill, said in debate on the House floor that "all hell could break loose" if the ban is not renewed. 
"Many, many special tax districts, utilities commissions, regulatory agencies and excise bureaus, 30,000 of them, are lying in wait, ready to pounce," Cox said. 
The picture painted by Wyden was somewhat less urgent. 
"I don't think Western Civilization is going to end if you pass the bill on Monday rather than Sunday," he said.
"But once the clock goes down on Sunday night, you're inviting trouble." 
Frank Shafroth, director of state and federal relations for the National Governors' Association, said states are not planning any new Internet tax initiatives, and only four state legislatures are even in session right now. 
"The sun is going to come up next Monday and the sky will not have fallen," Shafroth said.
The Hubble Space Telescope was alive and well on Wednesday after a pair of spacewalking astronauts finished a risky repair job that NASA compared to a heart transplant.
"Hubble has a heartbeat," said NASA spokesman Rob Navias, moments after the first streams of data arrived at ground stations.
Mission controllers were powering up and testing Hubble's systems one by one and were expected to be finished by midafternoon.
All the systems so far had returned in good shape, and NASA managers said they expected the rest would be OK.
managers had feared the operation to replace a faulty power control unit might have ended with Hubble no more than a costly piece of space junk if they could not restore power to the orbiting observatory.
It was not without drama, which included a leaking spacesuit, but NASA in the end had what it wanted -- an orbiting observatory that may someday see to the very edge of the universe.
Astronauts John Grunsfeld and Rick Linnehan from the space shuttle Columbia had the difficult task of replacing the aging observatory's power control unit, a 160-pound box that distributes electricity to all the satellite's instruments and flight systems.
had to turn off Hubble's power for the first time since it sat at the Kennedy Space Center in 1990 awaiting liftoff.
Since satellites are rarely turned off after launch, and Hubble had never been turned off, NASA counted the mission among its most risky and challenging.
The old power unit was meant to be a permanent component, never to be handled 350 miles above Earth by men in bulky pressure suits, big white helmets and stiff, thick gloves.
"I can tell you there were a lot of people who thought we were crazy to even try it," said Preston Burch, NASA's Hubble program manager.
Comparing the procedure to a heart transplant, Dave Leckrone, the Hubble program scientist for NASA, said on Tuesday that "major surgery entails a certain degree of risk."
Linnehan had to disconnect most of the three dozen power couplings that led to various Hubble systems, much of the time using a special tool designed just for that job, since his gloved hand could not reach some of the cables and couplings.
Grunsfeld had the job of installing the new system, which because of its size presented many of the same obstacles.
As the last of 36 connections were made to the new unit, a cheer went up in the Customer Service Room at Houston's Johnson Space Center, where some of Hubble's astronomers had gathered.
Preparations for the mission began in 1993, when power fluctuations were traced to a loose screw in the control unit.
"There's been a huge amount of investment in time and preparation, but also I think a lot of emotion has been invested in this in both the hopes that it would work and the fears that it might not," said Bryan Austin, the lead flight director.
"I can tell you right now those emotions are coming out."
Once NASA cut the power to Hubble, ground controllers had about 10 hours to get it up and running again before the frigid cold of outer space damaged sensitive scientific instruments.
The old unit has never completely failed in orbit, but Hubble has done all of its great science work handicapped by the malfunctions.
Without the new unit, Hubble did not have the power to use all the new instruments being added on this mission, including a new imaging camera, a new cooling system and the resuscitation of a long-dormant infrared spectrometer.
The job was almost stymied before it began.
About 25 minutes before Grunsfeld and Linnehan were first scheduled to depressurize their airlock, Grunsfeld's suit suddenly began leaking water from a cooling system.
"I'm monitoring John's suit and there's a large bit of water here near the battery," radioed astronaut Jim Newman.
As much as 9 pounds may have leaked out, NASA said.
One official said the problem may have been caused by a power surge in the airlock that forced open a valve.
The astronauts were clearly concerned, since free-floating fluids are very hard to clean up in the weightlessness of space.
Grunsfeld was ordered into another suit and Linnehan stayed in the airlock throughout the two-hour delay.
had the option of postponing the spacewalk, but Austin decided to press on, since the Hubble had been prepped for its power-down.
President Bush said on Wednesday he had "a lot of confidence" in CIA Director George Tenet, who has come under fire after the Sept. 11 attacks revealed major gaps in U.S. intelligence operations. 
In his first visit to the CIA headquarters since the deadly attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, Bush offered up his support for the Central Intelligence Agency and its chief. 
"George and I have been spending a lot of quality time together," Bush quipped to about 500 CIA employees gathered in an igloo-shaped auditorium in Langley, Virginia.
"There's a reason.
I've got a lot of confidence in him and I've got a lot of confidence in the CIA.
And so should America." 
The fact that a coordinated hijacking of four aircraft could go undetected has raised questions about the U.S. intelligence system, sparking calls for a new approach to attacking terrorism.
Nearly 7,000 people are dead or missing and presumed dead following the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. 
Senate Intelligence Committee Vice Chairman Richard Shelby, an Alabama Republican, said in a television interview the top spying job was "getting away" from Tenet, though he stopped short of calling for the CIA director's resignation. 
Tenet, who entered the auditorium with Bush to a prolonged standing ovation, showed no signs of being ready to go. 
"On September 11, the forces of terror issued a brutal challenge to civilization itself," Tenet said.
"All of us here and at places of duty around the world know that the present fight will neither be short nor easy.
But our shared determination to see that fight through to victory -- the victory of life and freedom -- could not be greater.
" 
Bush, who toured the Counter Terrorist Center after his speech, said he had confidence in the CIA. 
"There is no better institute to be working with than the Central Intelligence Agency which serves as our ears and our eyes all around the world," said Bush, whose speech was carried on closed-circuit TV so covert operatives could see it. 
In comments later to reporters at the White House, Bush said he was receiving "excellent intelligence" from the CIA. 
"These terrorists had burrowed in our country for over two years -- they were well organized, they were well planned.
They struck in a way that was unimaginable," he said. 
"Our nation should have all the confidence that the intelligence gathering capacity of the United States is doing everything possible to not only keep us informed about what's happening overseas but to keep us informed about what might happen here at home." 
Bush, who is traveling to Chicago on Thursday to meet airline workers, was expected to announce new airline safety proposals likely to include strengthened airliner cockpit doors and sky marshals on board commercial jets, an official said. 
Without giving details, Bush said the package would include measures "to try to convince the American public it is safe to fly." 
World leaders are offering their support in Bush's war against terrorism in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks. 
Bush spent part of Wednesday drumming up support for a global coalition against terror, speaking in the morning to Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev and Dutch Prime Minister Wim Kok. 
Bush thanked the Kazakh president for his support.
Kazakhstan on Monday offered its strategically vital airports and bases for a potential strike on Afghanistan. 
Central Asia could be a key staging area against Afghanistan, which has sheltered Saudi-born exile Osama bin Laden.
Bush says bin Laden, whom he called "an evil man" and his al Qaeda organization are the prime suspects for the Sept. 11 attacks and has vowed to bring them to justice. 
In the afternoon Bush met Egyptian Foreign Minister Ahmed Maher to discuss the coalition and cooperation with one of Washington's key allies in the Middle East. 
Egyptian Foreign Ministry sources said Maher would deliver a letter from Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak outlining his country's views.
They said he would urge a deliberate and well-prepared response to the suicide attacks. 
As part of his ongoing effort to urge religious tolerance in the wake of the attacks, Bush had separate meetings with Sikh community leaders and with leading members of the Muslim community in the afternoon. 
WASHINGTON/ISLAMABAD (Reuters) -
The United States on Sunday stepped up demands that Afghanistan surrender Islamic militant Osama bin Laden, dismissing protests from the ruling Taliban that it has lost contact with the guerrilla leader who is now the most wanted man in the world. 
As mourners jammed New York's Yankee Stadium in a tribute to the nearly 7,000 people dead or missing in the Sept. 11 assaults on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, U.S. forces massed within striking distance of the landlocked Central Asian country. 
Washington has bluntly warned the Taliban they will face U.S. military action unless they hand over bin Laden. 
"We are not going to be deterred by comments that he may be missing.
We don't simply believe it," said Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser for President Bush.
"The Taliban is going to have to begin to understand it has a very tough choice to make." 
At the Camp David presidential retreat on Sunday, Bush and his wife, Laura, stood in an open field, their hands over their hearts, as Marines in dress uniform hoisted the U.S. flag to full staff for the first time since the Sept. 11 strikes. 
But prospects that the United States would soon return to normal looked dim as security and economic jitters spread.
Crop-dusting planes were grounded across the country Sunday as the FBI urged vigilance for "suspicious activity" -- fanning fears of possible chemical or biological attack. 
In New York, the Mayor's Office said the number of those missing in the wreckage of the World Trade Center's twin towers had jumped to 6,453, up 120 from the prior toll amid continued checks of lists of those unaccounted for. 
Asian stock markets sagged in early trading on Monday as economic analysts warned of more heavy losses this week after war fears and dwindling consumer confidence sent U.S. blue chip stocks plunging last week to their worst weekly loss since the Great Depression. 
Secretary of State Colin Powell said the United States would release evidence linking bin Laden to the attacks, which occurred when teams of hijackers sent two commercial jets smashing into New York's World Trade Center and a third into the Pentagon outside Washington.
A fourth hijacked jet crashed in Pennsylvania, apparently after passengers fought back against the hijackers. 
"I think in the near future, we will be able to put out a paper, a document, that will describe quite clearly the evidence that we have linking him to this attack," he said. 
Bush has demanded the Taliban hand over all leaders of bin Laden's al Qaeda organization in Afghanistan and close all camps used by the group or face military reprisals. 
In a sign it may be reconsidering its protection of the Saudi-born exile, a Taliban spokesman said the movement's spiritual leader had approved a request from the country's clerics that he leave the country.
But he said the message was not yet in bin Laden's hands. 
"We have still not been able to deliver the clerics' message to him because we could not find him," Taliban spokesman Abul Hai Mutmaen told Reuters by telephone from the southern Afghan city of Kandahar. 
Washington scoffed at the Taliban statement. 
Asked if he believed the Taliban had lost track of bin Laden, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said: "Of course not.
They know where he is." 
But Rumsfeld conceded that bin Laden -- who has denied involvement in the attacks -- may be able to evade U.S. forces, including special operations teams. "
No, I'm not confident that we will find him and use this firepower," he said. 
Rumsfeld underscored the uncharted nature of Bush's new "war on terrorism" and the difficulty of defining victory in a conflict which, while triggering the biggest U.S. military mobilization since the 1991 Gulf War, remains without clear borders or targets. 
"This is not a quick effort, a battle, an event, television event with cruise missiles ending it, with a signing ceremony on the Missouri at the end of World War II.
That isn't what this is about," he said. 
The FBI ordered all crop-dusting planes grounded until Monday morning, a move the Federal Aviation Administration said was made "for reasons of national security".
Time magazine, in its issue due out Monday, reported that a manual for crop-dusting equipment had been found during a search of the suspected hide-outs of some of those believed responsible for the Sept. 11 attacks. 
In New York, an estimated 20,000 people flocked to historic Yankee Stadium on Sunday to hear prayers from the world's major religions and patriotic words from military leaders in tribute to those killed and missing in the attacks. 
Clutching flags and photographs of the missing, they joined "A Prayer for America" and sobbed for the devastation wrought when the World Trade Center's two 110-story towers collapsed following the hijack attacks. 
Bob Russell, a firefighter with Manhattan's Ladder Company 22, said he was there to pay tribute to some 30 colleagues lost at the trade center -- among a staggering total of 343 firefighters dead or missing in the disaster. 
"They were unbelievable those guys," Russell said, accompanied by his wife and children. "
They're all gone." 
New York officials have said the chances of finding survivors 12 days after the attacks were very small, although rescue work continued. 
As the United States ramped up its response to the attacks, most Americans appeared solidly behind Bush, with 90 percent approving of the way he has handled his job, according to a CNN and USA Today poll. 
That was the highest rating for a U.S. president ever recorded by the Gallup polling group, overshadowing the previous record 89 percent scored by Bush's father, President George Bush, at the end of the 1991 Gulf War. 
In the world's markets, which fell sharply last week in response to the attacks and the possible U.S. response, investors were gearing up for more bad news on Monday. 
Stock markets in Sydney and Singapore dropped in early trading on Monday after last Friday's losses on Wall Street.
Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index rose on a technical rebound, while the Tokyo stock market was closed for a holiday. 
U.S. military preparations picked up more steam.
The Pentagon activated another 5,172 reserve troops on Saturday, a day after eight B-52 heavy bombers began departing for a buildup in the Gulf and Indian Ocean. 
U.S. officials said another deployment was expected to send additional warplanes to the area, bringing to more than 200 the number of planes that would join about 350 aircraft already in the region at land bases and on aircraft carriers. 
Bush was expected to issue an executive order designating specific groups and individuals as "terrorists" -- freezing their assets in the United States to starve them of financial support. 
Bush also moved to reward two allies, lifting U.S. sanctions imposed on Pakistan and India in 1998 for their nuclear tests.
The move had been expected after Pakistan agreed to cooperate in the hunt for bin Laden despite stiff domestic opposition and substantial popular support for the Taliban. 
Gulf Arab states pledged support for the U.S. moves on Sunday while condemning any attempt to link Islam with what they termed "these heinous terrorist acts.
" 
Iran and Syria, meanwhile, said any reprisals for the attacks should be under the umbrella of the United Nations, while a senior Iranian cleric warned that Muslims would not stand by if a Muslim country were to be attacked. 
In Kabul, witnesses and officials said the Taliban was building bunkers, installing anti-aircraft batteries and arming men in key border areas to defend against any U.S. attack. 
Afghan opposition forces reported launching new attacks in three northern provinces and taking at least one district from the Taliban in a campaign timed to coincide with the threats of a U.S. military strike. 
More than 200 people have been killed in two days of religious clashes in the northern Nigerian city of Kano triggered by protests against U.S. air strikes in Afghanistan, residents said Sunday. 
Most of the killings took place overnight as rival Muslim and Christian gangs rampaged in heavily populated districts on the outskirts of town despite a night curfew and orders to police to shoot protesters on sight. 
One of the worst hit areas was Zangon district outside the city center, a Muslim stronghold with a significant Christian minority.
Those fleeing were Christians. 
"People were slaughtered in Zangon.
There cannot be less than 200 killed last night," said one of many residents ferried in buses under military escort to Sabon Gari where most non-Muslim immigrants live. 
"As I speak with you now I can see a body burning in the street," said a Sabon Gari resident speaking by telephone. "
He appears to be a Muslim who strayed into Sabon Gari." 
More killings were reported in the Brigade district adjoining Sabon Gari. 
Officials have so far only spoken of "many killed" and have not issued any definitive figure on those killed. 
Religious riots over the past two years has claimed hundreds of lives.
Nigerian authorities are always keen to play down death figures so as not to provoke an escalation in clashes. 
"People are stranded.
People are trapped in various locations," said another resident who spent the night holed up in a city office. 
Hard pressed security forces used civilian buses to rush what were reported to be hundreds of injured to hospitals. 
Heavily armed soldiers guarded the few churches which held Sunday services, witnesses said.
Streets of northern Nigeria's commercial nerve center were deserted. 
The federal government of President Olusegun Obasanjo sent reinforcements of soldiers and police to the city from neighboring states. 
Tanks and armored cars patrolled the streets as night fell Saturday.
Police banned all vehicles from the streets on the second day of protests against U.S. action against Afghanistan's ruling Taliban for refusing to surrender Saudi-born dissident Osama bin Laden. 
The United States has named bin Laden as prime suspect behind suicide attacks on the United States last month. 
Obasanjo's two-year-old civilian government, which took over from military rulers, has been struggling with a spate of religious violence in the predominantly Muslim north. 
Nigeria is Africa's most populous nation, with over 110 million people divided almost evenly between Muslims and Christians. 
Analysts say the upsurge of sectarian violence followed the introduction of strict Islamic sharia penal code by some northern states, despite protests by non-Muslims. 
The clashes in Kano are potentially the most dangerous for oil-producing Nigeria as Kano is the biggest urban center in northern Nigeria and a hotbed of Islamic radicalism. 
Kano police commissioner Yakubu Bello Uba Saturday issued the order to shoot on sight rioters and other troublemakers. 
The protests, which began after Friday prayers, were intended to be peaceful, but local residents said they were hijacked by hoodlums from the city's army of unemployed youth.
The initial code name for the Pentagon's response to attacks on the United States, Operation Infinite Justice, likely will be changed to avoid offending Muslims, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said on Thursday. 
The issue arose at a Pentagon briefing when a reporter told Rumsfeld that several Islamic scholars objected to the name on the ground that only God, or Allah, can mete out infinite justice in their view. 
"I understand.
I understand," Rumsfeld replied.
"And obviously, the United States does not want to do or say things that create an impression on the part of the listener that would be a misunderstanding, and clearly that would be." 
This is the second time in a week that the administration may have tripped on terms that could alienate Muslims it would like to include in a broad coalition to fight terrorism. 
Earlier this week, White House said it regretted if President Bush's call Sunday for a "crusade" against terrorism had offended anyone. 
Rumsfeld acknowledged that "someone, somewhere" had dubbed what he termed a preliminary aspect of the Pentagon's military preparations Infinite Justice. 
The code name had been passed on to reporters by defense officials on Wednesday along with news of deployments of U.S. warplanes to within striking distance of Afghanistan. 
The United States is demanding, among other things, that Afghanistan's Taliban rulers -- who practice a strict form of Islam -- hand over Osama bin Laden,
suspected of masterminding the September 11 attacks on the Pentagon and World Trade Center that left more than 6,500 people dead or missing. 
Whether the name Infinite Justice will stand, "given what you've said and what I was aware of, I just don't know the answer.
But I doubt it," Rumsfeld told the reporter who cited Islamic scholars. 
"I don't think it can be said often enough that this is not an effort that is aimed at any religion or any people particularly, or even the people of a country," he said earlier in the briefing. 
On Sunday, Bush's reference to mounting a "crusade" against terrorism may have summoned up in the Arab world both the past -- the Christian struggle from 11th to 13th centuries to recapture Jerusalem from the Muslims -- and the present -- the depiction by some in the Arab world of Israel as a "crusader state." 
Ibrahim Hooper of the Washington-based Council on American-Islamic Relations, said: "Obviously the 'crusade' term is problematic and 'infinite justice,' if it's translated as ultimate justice, that's the prerogative of God." 
A good code name for this operation can be as important for the Pentagon as "branding" a consumer good, said Naseem Javed, president of New York-based ABC Namebank, a naming consultancy. 
"If they come up with a name that resonates in the region, it will help to achieve their mission," he said. 
William Arkin, an expert on the military who has studied code names and operations, said the choice was constrained by Pentagon naming conventions tied to the units and commands involved. 
In addition, "these days, names have to be politically correct, culturally sensitive and religiously neutral," he added in a telephone interview. 
On Monday, Bush visited a major mosque in Washington, partly to blast any backlash against Arab-Americans.
Hijackers of the airliners used in the attacks -- and one that crashed in rural Pennsylvania -- are believed to be mostly if not entirely from Arab countries. 
WASHINGTON/ISLAMABAD (Reuters) -
The United States tightened the diplomatic and military screws on Afghanistan on Thursday while seeking to convince Americans it was still safe to fly after deadly hijack attacks sent passenger jets hurtling into targets in New York and Washington. 
Afghanistan's ruling Taliban said it had managed to deliver a message to fugitive Islamic militant Osama bin Laden asking him to leave voluntarily. 
But as U.S. forces massed within striking distance of Kabul, the Taliban said it did not yet have a response from the man who Washington says masterminded the Sept. 11 attacks. 
"It's not like we can pick up the phone and talk to Osama, or fax a message to him.
He has no such facilities," Taliban Information Minister Qudrutullah Jamal told Reuters. 
With the U.S. aviation industry plunged into chaos following the Sept. 11 attacks, President Bush went to Chicago to urge travelers to "get on the airplanes, get on about the business of America." 
But even as Bush announced the deployment of National Guard troops at U.S. airports, more armed "air marshals" in the skies and better security for airline cockpits, U.S. officials said a new directive authorized the military to shoot down any commercial airliner deemed a threat to a population center. 
Those orders were given on Sept. 11, but came too late to stop the hijackers from plowing planes into New York's World Trade Center and the Pentagon near Washington.
Another airliner crashed in a field in Pennsylvania. 
The FBI, deep into what has become the biggest criminal investigation in U.S. history, released the names and pictures of 19 suspects accused of the hijackings -- and for the first time explicitly linked them to bin Laden. 
Nearly 7,000 people are dead or missing from the attacks, which have set off political maneuvering across the globe and threaten to send the world economy spinning into recession. 
In Kabul, Taliban leader Mullah Mohammad Omar authorized his government's officials to hold talks with U.S. civil rights leader Jesse Jackson in an effort to defuse the crisis. 
But U.S. officials said there was nothing to discuss, and reiterated that Afghanistan faced the prospect of punishing military strikes if it failed to hand over Saudi-born bin Laden and members of his al Qaeda network. 
"Rev. Jackson is fully aware of our position ...
We have nothing to negotiate.
They know what our position is," Secretary of State Colin Powell told reporters. 
He continued to voice defiance against the United States, warning his countrymen that any Afghan aiding foreign invaders would face the same fate as collaborators in their country's war against the Soviet Union in the 1980s. 
U.S. officials called another 607 Army reserve troops to active duty, bringing to more than 16,300 the number of part-time U.S. military personnel activated in what has become the biggest U.S. mobilization since the 1993 Gulf War. 
But Bush played down expectations that the U.S. military would soon swing into action against one of the poorest countries in the world -- while repeating that the United States was ready to use its power to force Afghanistan to give up bin Laden and his organization. 
"We must understand that sometimes we will see our resources deployed, sometimes we won't," he told airline workers at Chicago's O'Hare airport.
However, he said, "We will use the military might of the United States." 
Bush's trip to Chicago -- only his second outside of Washington since the attacks -- was a high-profile effort to revive confidence in the U.S. airline industry, which has seen mass cancellations and more than 100,000 job cuts since the strikes. 
"Everybody here who showed up for work at this important industry is making a clear statement, that terrorism will not stand," Bush told thousands of workers at O'Hare airport in a speech punctuated by the roar of jets taking off. 
The Bush plan calls for more armed federal marshals on planes, a bigger government role in passenger and baggage inspections and posting as many as 5,000 National Guard troops at U.S. airports for the estimated four to six months needed to adopt new measures. 
The government will also set aside $500 million to fortify cockpit doors and will fund development of transponders, which signal the airliner's whereabouts. 
But in a sign that U.S. aviation policy had changed for good after the attacks, the White House confirmed that Bush had authorized senior officers in his military chain of command to order any commercial airliner deemed an imminent threat to people below shot down. 
Taking no chances, two F-16 fighters scrambled on Thursday to escort an Air Canada jetliner back to Los Angeles after a disturbance erupted on board --- over a passenger smoking a cigarette in the airplane bathroom. 
The United States continued to build its international coalition against terror, which has drawn support from most of the world's major powers and left Afghanistan isolated. 
One day after U.S. officials said they did not foresee collective NATO military action in response to the attacks, the European Union affirmed it viewed U.S. retaliation as "legitimate" and sought a European role. 
"We asked the American administration and to the American president to give also a list of possible tasks (to us) that could be done," said Belgian Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt, whose country holds the European Union presidency. 
The United States proposed a draft U.N. resolution demanding countries freeze financial assets of anyone involved in "terrorist acts" and punish the perpetrators. 
But concerns over a U.S. military response remained, particularly in the Islamic world where even key U.S. allies have voiced doubts over the wisdom of attacking a Muslim nation. 
King Abdullah of Jordan met Powell and national security adviser Condoleezza Rice on Thursday to voice support for the U.S. campaign, but also to ask that Washington address the Israeli-Palestinian conflict -- reflecting fears that historical U.S. support for Israel could complicate the battle against terrorism. 
The FBI released the names and pictures of the 19 hijack suspects, and FBI Director Robert Mueller said one or more of the hijackers had contacts with al Qaeda -- the first time any U.S. law enforcement officer has drawn a connection between the hijackers and the bin Laden network. 
Ten people were arrested in Washington state, Kansas City, and Detroit for possessing fraudulent driver's licenses to haul hazardous materials as U.S. officials probed possible links between the attacks and other potential threats. 
In Pakistan, a senior security official said some people had been picked up for interrogation and were likely to provide vital information about bin Laden. 
While economic fears continued to circle the globe, the U.S. stock market bounced to a higher close with the Dow Jones industrial average ending up 1.33 percent. 
"This is a market that is very jittery
and it doesn't take much to move it one way or another," said Peter Coolidge, managing director of equity trading a Brean Murray & Co. 
With Afghanistan facing a major humanitarian crisis, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan appealed for $584 million in fresh emergency aid to cope with up to 7.5 million Afghans likely to suffer from hunger and displacement in coming months. 
"The world is united against terrorism.
Let it be equally united in protecting and assisting the innocent victims of emergencies and disasters," Annan said. 
Microsoft Corp.
MSFT.O will kick off the advertising campaign for its upcoming Windows XP operating system next week with the slogan, "Yes You Can", after "Prepare to Fly" was scrapped in the wake of the Sept. 11 hijack attacks, company executives said on Thursday. 
Microsoft's ad blitz is part of a four-month, $200 million marketing program around Windows XP, the latest version of the software giant's flagship product. 
Many in the PC and software industries are hoping Windows XP will breathe life into the sectors, which have been hammered by the slowing economy and sagging consumer confidence. 
Windows XP will hit retail store shelves on Oct. 25 but is available already pre-installed on some new PCs. 
To start building buzz, a 15-second prime time television "teaser" will debut on Monday Night Football on Oct. 15, Stephanie Ferguson, Microsoft's PC experience marketing director, told reporters. 
That will be followed with longer 60-second and 30-second ads on Oct. 18 showing people soaring over fields and through offices, in what is an echo of the abandoned flying theme. 
The spots, which will also hit cable and late-night time slots, show off Windows XP features like digital music, videoconferencing and video editing. 
And the new Windows theme music?
Observers have wondered what song Microsoft would pick to promote Windows XP after the company paid millions of dollars to The Rolling Stones for use of their hit "Start Me Up" in Windows 95 ads. 
After listening to hundreds of songs, Ferguson said she and her team settled on Madonna's "Ray of Light." 
"It's powerful, it's upbeat, it's positive, it fits with the theme, which is 'Yes
You Can'," Ferguson said. 
Ferguson declined to say how much Microsoft was paying for use of the song, and also declined to give details of how much of the overall $200 million would be spent on ads alone. 
Apart from TV spots, Microsoft will also roll out print ads in magazines and newspapers, banner ads online and billboards in major cities, Ferguson said. 
"This is going to be a pretty loud launch.
We'll have a pretty strong presence," Ferguson said. 
The company is also going ahead with an Oct. 25 launch party in New York City. 
After the Sept. 11 attacks in which hijackers slammed passenger jets into New York's World Trade Center towers and the Pentagon outside Washington, D.C., killing 5,600 people, Microsoft considered canceling the event. 
"We did have discussions about, is Oct. 25 still the launch date?
Is New York still an appropriate venue?"
Shawn Sanford, group product manager for Windows, told reporters. 
But the party got the green light again after New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani spoke directly with Microsoft co-founder and Chairman Bill Gates, Sanford said. 
Asked if Madonna would perform at the event, Sanford and Ferguson paused with smiles on their faces and glanced at each other before Sanford said people would have to wait and see. 
But while the Big Apple bash is still on, the attacks did force marketers to scrap their original slogan, "Prepare to Fly" and focus on "Yes You Can" to convey the idea that Windows XP will let users do more than ever with their computers, Ferguson said. 
"We did make some changes," Ferguson said.
"We were more explicitly using the term 'fly', never expecting it to be literal but making an analogy for empowerment and freedom." 
Other marketing activities will include 62 other launch events around the world that will reach an estimated 100,000 people and distributing 11 million CDs containing demonstrations of XP features in stores and with magazines, Ferguson said. 
Microsoft's ad agency is McCann Erickson, a unit of ad giant Interpublic Group of Cos. Inc. . 
Despite widespread consensus that XP is the best version of Windows yet, Sanford said it would be hard to top the Windows 95 launch six years ago, when the PC industry was booming and people lined up at midnight to snatch up the first copies. 
"It's just such a different world than '95," Sanford said.
"I don't think anything will compare to that product in that time ... but this is actually a bigger evolutionary step than Windows 95, but the time we're in is just a little different."
President Bush and congressional leaders agree the U.S. economy needs a shot in the arm to help it recover from the Sept. 11 hijack attacks, but are far from agreement on what to prescribe. 
Lawmakers on Thursday began pushing their ideas for economic stimulus after Bush announced on Wednesday he wants a package of about $60 billion to $75 billion.
Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan has also given his blessing for such a plan. 
Republicans lean toward tax cuts aimed at spurring business investment, while Democrats say the plan should include spending measures as well as tax cuts for businesses and consumers. 
"Our hope is that we can find the proper balance between spending and tax cuts and that within tax cuts, that we find the proper balance between investment incentives or commitments to expenditures," Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle, a South Dakota Democrat, told reporters. 
He mentioned the expensing of business equipment purchases and measures to encourage consumer spending. 
Budget writers in the House of Representatives and Senate, Republicans and Democrats, on Thursday urged a stimulus package of at least $60 billion even though it would mean a return to budget deficits.
But they said it should expire after one year and that the cost to the federal treasury should be made up over time, once the economy recovers, to protect the Social Security retirement system. 
"We may go into the red for a while, but it will only be long enough to get us out of this economic crisis," said Sen. Pete Domenici of New Mexico, the ranking Republican on the Senate Budget Committee. 
Bush wants to help businesses and to target tax relief to boost consumer spending, which drives nearly two-thirds of the U.S. economic activity.
The White House said another round of tax rebates similar to the check mailings this year is an option. 
A group of House Republicans urged fellow lawmakers to concentrate the package on tax measures that would "retain or create more jobs for Americans." 
Specifically they said they wanted to accelerate individual rate cuts called for in the $1.3 trillion 10-year tax cut Bush has signed into law, allow businesses to write off purchases of computers and other equipment faster, provide relief from the corporate alternative minimum tax (AMT), which companies say discourages investment in a slow economy, and lower the tax on gains from the sale of stock and other assets. 
Senate Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus, a Montana Democrat, said tax writers were considering accelerating rate reductions that were part of the Bush tax plan. 
"Everything is on the table," he told reporters after meeting with Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill and Senate and House tax writers. 
Baucus and Sen. Charles Grassley of Iowa, the top Republican on the Finance Committee, have said they prefer a temporary package of a few items for business and consumers that would give the biggest economic kick for the money. 
The package is likely to include some breaks for businesses, including accelerated depreciation of equipment.
It also could include AMT relief, a much cheaper alternative for the federal treasury than reducing the corporate income tax. 
House Majority Leader Dick Armey, a Texas Republican, and Senate Minority Leader Trent Lott, a Mississippi Republican, have pushed for a capital gains tax cut, but Democrats see it as a tax cut for the rich and it appears to be off the table. 
A group of liberal House Democrats urged a $200 billion package that would include expansion of unemployment benefits and federal aid to help unemployed workers with health care insurance costs.
The group also called for more spending on public works projects and a rebate for poor taxpayers. 
Democrats have been urging relief for low-wage earners who may not have benefited from the $38 billion income tax rebates this year because they do not earn enough to pay income taxes. 
Democrats lean toward a rebate or tax credit against payroll taxes, which finance Social Security.
Senate Republican leaders have said they could support an outright reduction in the tax.
Employers and employees would benefit as each pays half of it, but such a move would have implications for Social Security finances.
Russia withdrew on Friday a threat to leave the Salt Lake City Olympics after an emergency meeting between International Olympic Committee (IOC) president Jacques Rogge and Russian team leaders.
In the biggest political crisis to hit the Olympic movement since the Cold War, the Russians had threatened on Thursday to quit the Winter Games prematurely because of what they perceived was bad and biased judging.
"The national team will stay," Russia's IOC vice-president Vitaly Smirnov told Reuters.
"It will take part until the very end.
Russia will take part in all events, in all competitions and will take part in the closing ceremony."
Smirnov's assurance followed a meeting with Rogge at a luxury mansion in the exclusive suburb of Cottonwood and which brought a speedy resolution to the crisis.
He said Rogge had told him all the Russian complaints would be examined.
Russia, fuming over earlier decisions they believed had gone against them at the Salt Lake City Games, gave 24 hours notice on Thursday of their intention to pull out of the Olympics unless their concerns were addressed.
The Russians have filed a number of protests since the IOC and the ISU took the unprecedented step of awarding a second gold medal in the figure skating pairs competition to Canadian duo Jamie Sale and David Pelletier, who had finished second.
The decision followed a public outcry and a four-day North American media campaign to overturn the original result in which Russian pair Yelena Berezhnaya and Anton Sukharulidze won the gold on a 5-4 split vote.
A French judge was later suspended for misconduct.
The Russians had suffered another reverse on Friday when an appeal against Irina Slutskaya's second place in the women's figure skating was rejected.
Russia filed a protest against Thursday's figure skating result with team spokesman Rudolf Nezvegsky saying Slutskaya had skated as well as, if not better, than American gold medallist Sarah Hughes in the free programme.
Leonid Tygachev, the president of the Russian Olympic Committee, said the Russian figure skating federation and the National Olympic Committee had sent a protest to the International Skating Union (ISU).
"Maybe there should be a second gold medal because this is a real champion," Tygachev told Reuters television.
"We have not got an answer yet but we will be having a meeting today with Jacques Rogge.
"We were impressed by the American figure skaters...but two of them made small mistakes and, of course, Slutskaya was the best, better than the young American skater."
Speaking to reporters in the Kremlin, Russian President Vladimir Putin took an unusual swipe at 59-year-old Rogge who was elected into office last July in Moscow, replacing Juan Antonio Samaranch who had been at the top of the IOC for 21 years.
"Not the last reason is the change of generations in the International Olympic Committee," Putin said.
"Juan Antonio Samaranch has gone and Jacques Rogge has taken his place.
Regrettably for the new leadership, the first time is bound to be a flop."
He added: "Let us see how the Olympic Games end.
Let us hope that the IOC leadership will manage to solve these difficulties."
The Russian team were to meet the United States later on Friday in the ice hockey semifinal.
Union workers at two top South Korean carmakers walked out Tuesday, on the second day of an outlawed and unprecedented strike by railway and power unions over long working hours and privatization.
The four-hour stoppage at all plants of Hyundai Motor Co and affiliate Kia Motors extended to the private sector an indefinite strike by thousands of public sector workers, who are forbidden to strike under Korean law.
The government has threatened stern measures to end the rail and power strikes, which come at a critical time for the South Korean economy, one of the few bright spots in Asia.
Memories of how strikes at Hyundai Motor in December took a bite out of output and exports have added to concerns in a presidential election year -- and a year when eyes will be on the country as it co-hosts the soccer World Cup with Japan in June.
President Kim Dae-jung cannot seek re-election when his term ends a year from now.
But his party, which draws support from labor, is trailing in polls behind the pro-business main opposition party, which has been critical of his reforms.
"Kim should focus on curbing labor strife, which will likely flare up with regional and presidential elections lined up this year," said Huh Chan-kook, an economist at the Korea Economic Research Institute.
So far, there has been none of the violence associated with South Korean labor disputes of the late 1980s, when the country experienced up to 3,000 often bloody strikes each year.
There were 235 strikes last year, up from 129 in 1998 and 85 in 1996.
The government says the rail and power strike violates laws banning walkouts at public utilities.
Officials said it was the first such action in South Korea's turbulent labor history.
The strike was virtually ignored by financial markets.
Investors shook off the strike at Korea Electric Power Corp and railways, while airlines advanced as fewer trains held promise of busier air routes.
The unions want a halt to privatizing state utilities and shorter working hours.
They fear mass layoffs under government plans to restructure debt-ridden state firms.
The private sector manufacturing unions at Hyundai and Kia want shorter hours and more flexible shifts -- the core demand of the militant Korea Confederation of Trade Unions (KCTU), the second largest union grouping with 500,000 members.
"All Hyundai Motor plants halted production at 1 p.m. (0400 GMT) for four hours in line with the KCTU strike," Cho Byoung-hee, a Hyundai union spokesman, told Reuters.
A Kia union spokesman said union workers had also walked out at all its plants.
had said 100,000 workers would walk out Tuesday unless labor laws are revised to ensure a five-day work week.
Hyundai Motor was hit by three weeks of intermittent strikes in December, delaying the output of some 59,000 cars.
Hyundai has about 50,000 workers, of whom 38,000 are union members.
Many people work six days a week in South Korea, where laws mandating a 44-hour work week are often ignored.
Last year, the average worker put in 20.4 hours overtime a week, officials say.
The government and state-run firms took emergency steps to avoid interruption to gas and power supplies.
But the rail stoppage disrupted transport, delaying delivery of export cargoes to ports and prompting two-hour delays and crowded trains in Seoul in what local media dubbed a "commuter war."
South Korea's economy grew three percent in 2001 and it projects growth of as much as four percent this year.
But experts say the vital export sector can ill afford more shocks after recent global weakness.
"Export industries still remain weak and it looks too early to expect a fully fledged recovery in months to come," Huh said.
The country's largest union, the 13-million-member Federation of Korean Trade Unions (FKTU) restarted negotiations Tuesday with state rail authorities but reached no agreement.
Florida Marlins righthander Alex Fernandez, sidelined since early in the 2000 season with arm problems, announced his retirement Wednesday. 
One of four holdovers from the Marlins' 1997 World Series championship team, Fernandez last pitched for Florida on May 18, 2000 before being sidelined with elbow problems. 
Fernandez, who also has battled shoulder problems, finished his career with a 107-87 record and 3.74 ERA in 263 games.
He spent the first seven years of his career with the Chicago White Sox before joining the Marlins. 
"I have had a great career which was highlighted by a world championship in 1997 with the Marlins," said Fernandez, who starred at the University of Miami.
"I would like to thank the Marlins organization for allowing me the opportunity to finish the career in front of my family, friends and the fans of South Florida." 
"Alex has been determined to make a complete comeback from his injuries," Marlins president-general manager Dave Dombrowski said.
"He has not only been a bulldog on the mound but in his rehabilitation to achieve his goal.
It is unfortunate that he has not been able to achieve his goal and return to the game." 
In his first season with the Marlins in 1997 after signing a five-year, $35 million deal, Fernandez helped the club to its only championship by going 17-12 with a 3.59 ERA in 32 starts.
He was the winning pitcher in Game Three of the National Division Series against San Francisco as the Marlins completed a sweep. 
But after that successful season, Fernandez missed the entire 1999 campaign with a torn right rotator cuff.
He returned the following year and went 7-8 with a 3.38 ERA in 24 starts. 
In his final season in 2000, Fernandez went 4-4 with a 4.13 ERA in eight starts. 
Catcher Charles Johnson, outfielder Cliff Floyd and reliever Antonio Alfonseca are the only Marlins remaining from the 1997 championship team which was dismantled for financial purposes. 
Music and motion picture companies filed suit Wednesday against a trio of online file-swapping sites that enable users to download copyrighted music, movies and other files for free. 
A wide range of music labels and film studios filed the suit with the hopes that a California federal court will shut down Grokster Ltd., MusicCity.com Inc., MusicCity Networks Inc. and Consumer Empowerment BV, which operate services that enable users to trade a wide variety of digital media files. 
The services, which go by the names Morpheus, Grokster and Kazaa, have grown rapidly since pioneering music-swap site Napster went dark in early July. 
In the complaint, plaintiffs said the services profit by violating the copyrights of their material. 
"Defendants have created a 21st century piratical bazaar where the unlawful exchange of protected materials takes place across the vast expanses of the Internet," the complaint said. 
Users can find movies still in theaters, such as Planet of the Apes and Legally Blonde, as well as new releases by recording artists such as Bob Dylan and 'N Sync, a recording-industry trade group said in a release. 
The move comes at a time when the recording industry is attempting to roll out digital-music services of its own, which plan to give users limited access in exchange for a monthly fee. 
Backers of industry ventures MusicNet and Pressplay plan to introduce their services within the next two months. 
"We cannot sit idly by while these services continue to operate illegally, especially at a time when new legitimate services are being launched," said Hilary Rosen, president of the Recording Industry Association of America. 
But unlike Napster, which eventually agreed to purge its system of copyrighted files in March after a long court battle, Morpheus, Grokster and Kazaa could prove harder to shut down. 
Consumer Empowerment, which operates the Kazaa portal, is based in the Netherlands, while Grokster Ltd. is incorporated in Nevis, a 36-square-mile island in the Caribbean.
Music City, operator of Morpheus, is based in Tennessee. 
But even if all three services were shut down, the network would continue to operate, Music City Chief Executive Steve Griffin told Reuters in August. 
Users of all three services tap into one network developed by Consumer Empowerment, called Kazaa. 
Unlike Napster, which routes all traffic through a central server operated by the company, FastTrack uses a decentralized system. 
Napster users were no longer able to trade music when the company shut down its central server in July.
But FastTrack users would still be able to use their proprietary software to trade music, movies and other files even if all three companies went out of business, Griffin said. 
"The network is self-sustaining," he said. 
Backers of the MusicNet service, including RealNetworks Inc., AOL Time Warner Inc.'s Warner Music, EMI Group Plc, Bertelsman AG's BMG and independent Zomba Records, plan to launch their service within two months. 
Pressplay is a joint venture between Vivendi Universal's Universal Music Group and Sony Corp.'s Sony Music Entertainment.
North Carolina Gov. Mike Easley on Tuesday commuted the death sentence of a convicted murderer whose lawyers had argued the governor could not fairly consider clemency pleas because he had earlier served as the state's top prosecutor. 
Robert Bacon Jr., who had been set to die at 2 a.m. on Friday in the death chamber of the state's Central Prison in Raleigh, will instead serve a life sentence without parole for stabbing his lover's husband to death in 1987. 
"I am satisfied that the prosecutors and judges acted fairly and professionally in this case," Easley said in a statement. "
However, as governor, my review of this matter in its totality causes me to conclude that the appropriate sentence for the defendant is life without parole." 
Bacon was convicted of conspiring with his then-lover, Bonnie Clark, to murder her husband, Marine Sgt.
Glennie Clark, for a share of his $130,000 life insurance policy. 
Defense attorneys in appeals pending in federal court argued that Bacon's jury was racially biased.
Bacon, who is black, was condemned to die, while Clark, a white woman convicted of plotting the murder, was sentenced to life in prison. 
Bacon had been scheduled to die by lethal injection in May, but was given a stay by the state Supreme Court, which agreed to consider whether Easley, a former state Attorney General, could fairly consider clemency petitions. 
The court later confirmed the governor has absolute authority to consider clemency pleas, and lifted its stay. 
Bacon's execution was subsequently rescheduled for September, but delayed by Easley in the wake of the Sept. 11 suicide attacks on New York and Washington out of concern about his access to the courts as lawyers filed appeals. 
Beaming with pride at the United Nations winning the Nobel Peace Prize on Friday, Secretary-General Kofi Annan then rolled up his metaphorical sleeves and said now "more will be expected of us." 
He specifically mentioned Afghanistan and the tasks ahead, not only massive relief efforts but perhaps building a coalition government in the impoverished central Asian nation. 
On a personal note, Annan, a 63-year-old Ghanaian, said, "It's a wonderful feeling.
It's a great recognition for the staff."
He then told a news conference, "In the sort of business we are in, usually when you get a call that early in the morning it is something disastrous." 
The decision of the Nobel committee to award the prize to Annan and the United Nations reaffirmed the importance of the world body, created in San Francisco in 1945 on the ashes of World War Two.
It suffered through the Cold War, the inability to bring a complete disarmament to Iraq and now has emerged once again as a force on the global stage. 
"All of us who work for the U.N. should be proud today but also be humble, because even more will be expected of us in the future," he told a news conference. 
His wife Nane, a Swedish lawyer and artist, was at his side.
"It's wonderful," she said.
And in Ghana, his 71-year old sister, Esi Arthur told Reuters: "We're so happy, so very happy.
I don't know what to say.
We give thanks to God and we ask him to give him even more wisdom." 
President Bush on Thursday embraced for the first time a central role of the United Nations in rebuilding Afghanistan after the ruling Taliban is ousted.
American forces are now attempting to root out terrorist groups in Afghanistan, harboring Saudi-born militant Osama bin Laden, the main suspect in the Sept. 11 attacks against the United States. 
Annan cautiously acknowledged the United Nations may have a role to play but he said the Afghans themselves had to agree to U.N. peacemaking or help to set up a broad-based government, saying it would depend on resources and support. 
But he acknowledged said, "I think when you look around, the United Nations is the only organization that in the past has done the kind of work that may be necessary in Afghanistan -- depending on developments of course." 
The Norwegian Nobel Committee praised the United Nations and Annan for working for peace throughout the world and said he had brought "new life" to the world body and had fought for human rights and against AIDS and terrorism. 
Annan, who has worked for the world body for three decades, headed peacekeeping operations before he became secretary-general in 1997.
The United States helped put him in office after preventing through a veto his predecessor, Egyptian Boutros Boutros-Ghali, from taking a second term. 
Annan was easily elected to a second five-year term months before his first term expires in December, an unprecedented vote of confidence. 
With some 52,000 employees around the globe, some 5,000 of them in the New York headquarters, the United Nations has half a dozen regional branches and scores of field offices. 
In addition to the well-known peacekeeping function, the United Nations has more than 30 affiliated groups or branches to promote respect for human rights, protect the environment, fight disease, forge development and reduce poverty. 
U.N. agencies also define the standards for transport by air and sea, help improve telecommunications, ensure intellectual property rights, coordinate allocation of radio frequencies, and make loans to developing countries. 
The prize is the first for the United Nations as a whole.
The U.N. Children's Fund won in 1965, the International Labor Organization in 1969, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees in 1954 and 1981, and U.N. peacekeepers in 1988. 
World leaders poured in congratulations, including British Prime Minister Tony Blair, German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder, Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Perez, Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat, Lebanese President Emile Lahoud and Portuguese Foreign Minister Jaime Gama, among others. 
India's U.N. ambassador, Kamalesh Sharma, said the prize made Annan a "real global celebrity, like a rock star.
" 
"It is a recognition as much of his exceptional leadership as the centrality of the organization which he leads." 
And in Annan's homeland of Ghana, he was praised to his close ties to his country, although he had lived in Europe and the United States for decades.
"
As a son of Ghana, you've made the whole nation proud," President John Kufor said. 
But Antoine Mugesara, a representative of Rwandan genocide survivors, recalled the "mess" he said Annan had made during the 1994 killings when he was head of U.N. peacekeeping operations.
And in Bosnia, survivors of the 1995 massacre of up to 8,000 Muslim men and boys by Bosnian Serbs in Selenic said they were "appalled" by the Nobel award. 
But South Africa's U.N. Ambassador Dumisani Kumalo, noting Annan's efforts in many other parts of the continent said: "It is a delicious irony that the African continent, which is riddled with conflict, would now have five Nobel Peace Prize winners, possibly more than any other continent." 
The four other winners -- all from South Africa -- are former presidents Nelson Mandela and F.W. de Klerk , retired Anglican Archbishop Desmond Tutu and the late Albert Luthuli , a former leader of the now-ruling African National Congress.
Former Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Ridge was sworn in on Monday as the first U.S. director of homeland security with a "difficult but not impossible" task -- head off terrorism in America before it happens again. 
With the nation on edge over feared reprisals for U.S.-led air strikes on Afghanistan, President Bush and his entire Cabinet watched in the East Room of the White House as Ridge raised his right hand, placed his left on a Bible held by his teen-age daughter Lesley, and repeated the oath of office. 
After he swore to "support and defend the Constitution of the United States against all enemies, foreign and domestic," Ridge leaned over and whispered to his daughter, "I love you." 
The Cabinet-level position has enormous scope, from protecting energy production, information and transport systems to reviewing all federal emergency response plans. 
Bush said he had found "the right man" to forge an effective anti-terrorism strategy for a nation traumatized by the Sept. 11 attacks that destroyed the World Trade Center, damaged the Pentagon and killed more than 5,500 people. 
Ridge, a 56-year-old decorated Vietnam combat veteran and former congressman who was widely rumored as a candidate for the job of vice president or defense secretary when the newly elected Bush was choosing his Cabinet, has been a friend of the president's family for two decades. 
"The size and scope of this challenge are immense," Ridge said.
Comparing it to building the transcontinental railroad, fighting World War Two or putting a man on the moon, he added, "The task before us is difficult, but not impossible." 
Acknowledging the job would take unprecedented cooperation and communication between government departments and agencies, Ridge cautioned, "The only turf we should be worried about protecting is the turf we stand on." 
Bush and other key members of the government have warned of possible retaliatory attacks against Americans in response to the administration's war on terrorism to punish the Islamic militants blamed for last month's attacks. 
The number of possible targets is endless, from nuclear power plants to crowded subway trains.
Many Americans have been buying gas masks and antibiotics out of fear of attack with chemical or biological weapons. 
"I know that many Americans at this time have fears," Bush said before he signed an executive order creating the homeland security post.
"We've learned that America is not immune from attack.
We've seen that evil is real." 
"America is going to be prepared," he declared. 
Attorney General John Ashcroft said on Monday 614 people had been arrested or detained since Sept. 11, but that law enforcement officials were still looking for 229 others. 
"I encourage all Americans to continue to have a heightened sense of awareness of their surroundings," Ashcroft said.
"Every American should be vigilant and we are counting on each American to help defend our nation in this war." 
Some experts and lawmakers say it is almost impossible to safeguard such a vast nation, and have urged Congress and the White House to give Ridge greater powers to mobilize a nationwide defense that would reassure the public. 
"No homeland czar can possibly hope to coordinate the almost hopeless dispersal of authority that currently characterizes the 40 or more agencies ... with some piece of responsibility for protecting the homeland," warned former Sen. Gary Hart, co-chair of the U.S. Commission on National Security for the 21st Century. 
The White House said Ridge would have a direct staff of 12 and about 100 more who are at other federal agencies and who will report to him.
He will have an office in the West Wing and will report directly to Bush. 
His position is not subject to Senate confirmation and White House spokesman Ari Fleischer told reporters on Monday Bush saw no need for it.
He said Ridge would be "very senior," attending Cabinet meetings and national security briefings. 
Despite heightened security after the attacks, especially at U.S. airports, experts say the nation's borders remain porous in some places, and it would be impossible to defend every potential target because there are so many.
At the same time, congressional investigators say federal, state and local health agencies are poorly coordinated and ill equipped. 
An attack using chemical or biological agents could sicken thousands of Americans before it is even detected.
But experts say local doctors, nurses and emergency medical technicians, who would be the first on the scene, have had little training with such diseases as smallpox and anthrax.
The Houston Astros must have been blinded by the division title in their sights. 
Jeff Bagwell made a pair of throwing errors and Moises Alou dropped a fly ball as the Astros wasted their first chance of winning the National League Central Division title, suffering a 10-6 loss Saturday to the St. Louis Cardinals. 
Dave Veres worked out of a bases-loaded jam in the seventh inning and Jim Edmonds collected four RBI for the Cardinals, who set up a winner-take-all regular-season finale. 
"It was a really exciting game," Cards manager Tony La Russa said.
"It sets up even more fun tomorrow.
We'll come out tomorrow and enjoy playing the last game of the season.
With stakes like that, that's what you dream about." 
The teams started the day tied atop the Central with identical 92-68 records, but the Astros could have clinched the division with a win, based on their edge in the season series.
Now, the Cardinals can take the division with a win Sunday. 
Houston can win its fourth division title in five years with a victory Sunday.
That would give the Astros and Cards identical 93-69 records and Houston a 9-7 edge in the season series. 
"It's all on the line," Astros closer Billy Wagner said.
"The better team will win tomorrow and they will be the division champions. 
"The good thing is, we're both going to the playoffs.
But if you want that title as the best in our division, the best team's got to show up tomorrow.
" Sunday's loser will be the NL wild card and visit the West champion Arizona Diamondbacks in a Division Series.
The winner will host the Atlanta Braves. 
With newly minted home run champion Barry Bonds sitting out, James Baldwin tossed seven scoreless innings as the Los Angeles Dodgers rolled to a 6-2 victory over the San Francisco Giants. 
One night after hitting his 71st and 72nd homers to break the single-season major league record, Bonds was kept out of the starting lineup.
But he received a standing ovation when he appeared as a pinch hitter with one out in the bottom of the ninth inning, lining the only pitch he saw into right field for a single. 
Bonds immediately left for a pinch runner and pinch hitter
J.T. Snow delivered a two-run single with two out.
But it was not enough for the Giants, who were eliminated from postseason contention following Friday night's 11-10 loss. 
Acquired from the Chicago White Sox to improve the Dodgers' playoff chances, Baldwin ended a personal five-game losing streak.
He gave up three singles and two walks and struck out two for his first win since August 23. 
Matt Herges breezed through the eighth but ran into trouble in the ninth before Jeff Shaw struck out rookie Cody Ransom for his 43rd save in 52 chances. 
Rickey Henderson got just one hit, but Phil Nevin hit three homers. 
Henderson doubled in the first inning to move within one hit of 3,000 and Nevin supplied the offense with his three blasts as the San Diego Padres routed the visiting Colorado Rockies, 10-4. 
After collecting his 2,999th career hit to lead off the bottom of the first, Henderson had four more at-bats to become the 25th player to reach the hallowed milestone. 
But the all-time leader in steals and runs scored, grounded out to second in the second, flied out to right in the fifth and sixth and bounced out to shortstop in the eighth. 
"I keep getting closer and closer, but it ain't happening now," Henderson said.
"We'll see what happens tomorrow.
If it's meant to be, it will happen tomorrow.
" 
Julian Tavarez carried a no-hitter into the eighth inning and Roosevelt Brown drove in a career-high seven run as the Chicago Cubs posted a 13-2 victory over the visiting Pittsburgh Pirates in the first game of a doubleheader. 
With one out in the eighth, Tavarez gave up a bases-loaded single to Mendy Lopez, scoring Craig Wilson and Gary Matthews Jr.
It was the only hit allowed by the righthander, who walked five and struck out nine.
He became the fourth Cubs pitcher to reach double figures in victories this season. 
Brown hit three-run homers in the first and eighth innings and lifted a sacrifice fly in the seventh. 
In the second game, David Coggin allowed one run and eight hits in seven innings as the Phillies downed the Reds, 5-1. 
The sweep was the Phillies first in Cincinnati since May 26, 1963.
Philadelphia clinched second place in the National League East with a 2-1 triumph in the opener. 
Coggin walked three, struck out two and won for just the second time in eight starts. 
The Cincinnati Reds have never been worse at home. 
Cincinnati fell to a woeful 27-52 at Cinergy Field, its worst home mark since the club lost 51 times while playing at Crosley Field in 1937. 
Daal , a 19-game loser last season, had something to do with the Reds' latest home loss.
The crafty lefthander surrendered just three hits, walking none while striking out three.
Conservative radio talk show host Rush Limbaugh, who announced this week that he has lost his hearing, suffers from a rare ear disease and is being treated by specialists in Los Angeles, doctors said on Wednesday. 
Limbaugh, 50, whose daily radio program is heard by 22 million listeners on 600 stations a week, has been diagnosed with auto-immune inner ear disease (AIED), which causes less than one percent of all cases of hearing loss, according to a statement from the House Ear Clinic and Institute in Los Angeles. 
Doctors believe the ailment is caused by the body's immune system attacking the inner ear and damaging the hearing nerve. 
Physicians at the House Ear Clinic are treating Limbaugh with medication, and "there is some potential for surgical treatment as well," the statement said.
"The physicians are confident that with the proper treatment, Mr. Limbaugh will be able to retain some of his hearing." 
The outspoken Florida-based radio host stunned listeners on Monday by announcing on his program, "I am, for all practical purposes, deaf," though he vowed to continue working.
Limbaugh was back on the air Tuesday but took Wednesday off to consult with physicians in Los Angeles. 
A spokesman said he was due back at work Thursday, while doctors at the House Ear Clinic planned to hold a news conference to discuss Limbaugh's condition and treatment.
Kraig T. Kitchin, president and chief operating officer of Premiere Radio Networks, which distributes Limbaugh's program, also planned to attend the briefing. 
Limbaugh in July signed a deal with Premiere, reportedly valued at $285 million, to keep his 13-year-old show on the air for another eight years. 
A spokeswoman for Premiere told Reuters the radio network, owned by Clear Channel Communications Inc., was committed to keeping Limbaugh on the air through 2009. 
Limbaugh has said his hearing has steadily deteriorated since May when he discovered he heard nothing in his left ear.
He said he can recognize sound but not identify it in his right ear. 
A number of observers have said the revelation about Limbaugh's deafness explained why the radio host had sounded different on the air in recent months.
Some said they believed that calls into the show were being transcribed onto a TelePrompTer for Limbaugh to read.
U.S. planes bombed targets in Afghanistan early on Friday in a fifth straight night of raids which the ruling Taliban say have killed more than 200 people. 
Weary and frightened residents in the capital Kabul reported a dozen strong explosions in the early hours of the morning. 
"There were up to five very strong explosions, I think it was about 15 km (nine miles) to the northwest of Kabul," one resident told Reuters. "
Taliban fighters were firing anti-aircraft fire." 
He said a lone jet had screamed over the city.
It was not immediately clear what the latest attacks had been targeting. "
Now, there's another one, another very, very strong explosion," he added, shortly afterwards. 
"That's three more in the last few minutes, the last one I saw from the window, it was to the west of Kabul." 
Late on Thursday, up to five U.S. jets bombed areas south of the capital, apparently hitting a Taliban munitions dump, sending balls of flame into the night sky. 
The United States and Britain launched the raids on Sunday to force the Taliban to hand over Osama bin Laden, the man Washington accuses of masterminding the devastating September 11 suicide hijack attacks on the United States. 
In Washington, U.S. officials said that B-52 and B-1 bombers pounded Taliban troops, bunkers and weapons with deadly cluster and other bombs in different parts of the country on Thursday. 
Many residents have already fled cities for the relative safety of the countryside. 
"I've not been able to sleep now since the war began five nights ago," said one exhausted Kabul resident.
"I am so tired." 
The Taliban, who have been sheltering Saudi-born bin Laden since the mid-1990s, have bitterly denounced the raids and called on Muslims around the world to rally to their defense. 
"When Americans enter Afghanistan, there will start the real war," the isolated government's only international envoy, Ambassador to Pakistan
Mullah Abdul Salam Zaeef, said on Thursday. 
"America is thirsty for more bloodshed in Afghanistan," he told a news conference in Pakistan. "
The number of casualties is increasing with the passage of time.
This is a gift of America to the innocent people of Afghanistan." 
He said that bin Laden, who fought with the Taliban against occupying Soviet forces in the 1980s, was alive and well as was Taliban leader Mullah Mohammad Omar. 
The eastern city of Jalalabad, long surrounded by guerrilla training camps for bin Laden's al Qaeda network, has come under particularly heavy bombardment. 
The Taliban say 15 civilians, mainly women and children, were killed when a mosque was hit in the city's Surkhrod suburb. 
They reported rescuers digging for the remains of 100 civilians feared killed after a bomb or missile hit Khoruma village, near Jalalabad. 
There was no independent confirmation of either incident. 
Residents fleeing the southern Taliban stronghold of Kandahar said Mullah Omar's 10-year-old son and stepfather had been killed in a direct hit on one of his houses. 
The Pentagon earlier said two of Omar's male relatives had been killed.
Zaeef denied that. 
The bombardments have prompted an exodus of refugees toward Pakistan, many with their belongings piled hastily onto donkeys.
Others crossed the rugged and porous border on camels. 
Anti-Taliban forces loyal to Afghan warlord
Ismail Khan said they had captured the town of Chaghcharan, straddling a vital road linking Kabul to the western city of Herat. 
Independent confirmation was not immediately available, but losing Chaghcharan, 218 miles west of Kabul, would be a major blow to the Taliban. 
The opposition Northern Alliance said on Tuesday that a group of Taliban commanders had changed sides and closed the Bagram-Bamiyan road to their former comrades. 
The Taliban have dismissed the claim.
Xerox Corp. XRX.N on Friday it expects a wider-than-expected third-quarter loss, but remains "cautiously" optimistic about fourth-quarter profitability, after the Sept. 11 attacks hurt sales and set off a litany of unusual expenses for copier and printer giant. 
Stamford, Connecticut-based Xerox, best known for its office photocopiers, said it expects third-quarter revenues of $3.8 billion to $4 billion and a loss of 22 cents a share to 25 cents a share before restructuring charges of 5 cents a share. 
Wall Street analysts, on average, were expecting the company to post a third-quarter loss of 12 cents a share and revenues of $3.94 billion, according to Thomson Financial/First Call.
The company is slated to report results on Oct. 23. 
Shares of Xerox edged lower in early trade on Friday, dipping 24 cents, or about 3 percent, to $7.90, on volume of about 900,000. 
Xerox cited several factors for the shortfall, including a reduction of about 9 cents due to currency losses from unhedged exposures, a tax rate change, and a property insurance deductible related to losses from the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. 
"In many regards, Xerox's performance in July and August exceeded expectations and we were well positioned to meet our third-quarter targets," said Anne Mulcahy, Xerox chief executive, in a statement.
"
However, the events of Sept. 11 resulted in a significant impact on sales for the balance of the month -- typically the strongest two weeks of the quarter." 
She added that Xerox remains cautiously optimistic about fourth-quarter operating profitability given further progress in the company's cost-cutting efforts. 
"We continue to aggressively implement our cost-reduction initiatives and focus on operational improvements," she added.
"With further progress expected in these areas, we remain cautiously optimistic for a return to operational profitability in the fourth quarter," added Mulcahy. 
The company, which has diligently this year worked on a turnaround plan aimed at selling assets and cutting billions in costs, has for months fostered confidence among investors built upon its hope of showing a profit in the year's final quarter. 
But in recent weeks, Wall Street analysts, while commending the company for implementing its turnaround plan, said Xerox might find it hard to hit its targets in the face of the complex and weak economic environment and tough competition. 
"Seeing very strong execution on turn-around initiatives so far, we continue to rate shares of Xerox (at "outperform,") said Salomon Smith Barney analyst Jonathan Rosenzweig in a recent note to clients. 
"That said, we are inclined to remain a bit more cautious ahead of the third quarter release given a high degree of uncertainty over the impact which macro conditions might have on management's target for revenues and Q4 profitability," he said. 
The company, which is under investigation for alleged accounting irregularities in Mexico, also said in a statement that it was in compliance with debt covenants and had $2.4 billion in cash as of Sept. 30. 
Earlier this month, Xerox replaced its accountant in a move that analysts said was part of the company's efforts to make a fresh start after past problems.
The company has been trying to fix its troubled core operations while contending with questions about its books.
Coca-Cola Co. ( KO ) on Tuesday lowered its volume growth outlook for the year to a level widely anticipated by Wall Street, and said it remains confident it will meet its earnings target for the year despite a slowdown in U.S. growth rates since the recent attacks. 
Atlanta-based Coca-Cola, the world's top soft drink company, cut its full-year forecast for unit case volume growth to 4 percent to 5 percent from a previous target of 5 percent to 6 percent growth.
Unit case volume is a key measure of financial health in the soft-drink industry. 
"The Street didn't expect 5 to 6 (percent volume growth).
The street very much had the 4 to 5 view,
so that's why the stock is doing well," said ABN Amro beverage analyst Mark Swartzberg.
"In this atmosphere, a company doing what the Street expects is clearly a good thing." 
Shares of Coca-Cola edged up 2 cents to $48.03 in late afternoon trade on the New York Stock Exchange after climbing as high as $49.26 earlier in the session. 
"Even though the underlying fundamental strengths of our business have not changed, caution dictates that we closely monitor the increased uncertainty in macroeconomic conditions," Chairman and Chief Executive Doug Daft said in a statement.
"Not surprisingly, following the tragic events of Sept. 11, we have experienced lower growth rates in the United States." 
UBS Warburg beverage analyst Caroline Levy said it was "kind of surprising" that Coke said U.S. sales had shown a reaction to the recent events.
"I would have expected them to say 'because we slowed advertising we've had a short term effect' or something like that.
You just don't expect soft drinks to be economically sensitive, you really don't." 
Coke also said it expects its unit case volume to grow by about 3 percent in North America for the quarter, also in line with earlier views from analysts. 
The company said it sees third-quarter unit case volume up 3 percent to 4 percent in both its Latin America and Europe, Eurasia and Middle East regions.
The company also said it sees third-quarter volume jumping 8 percent to 9 percent in Africa and 7 percent to 8 percent in Asia. 
Coke's full-year volume outlook was met with satisfaction from analysts.
On Monday, Levy trimmed her 2001 volume estimate to 3.6 percent, down from over 4 percent, due in part to the economic slowdown.
She said a U.S. recession "could cause slowdowns" for Coke in Latin America and other regions. 
On Tuesday, Levy said there was a good chance Coke will come in at the low end of its 4 percent to 5 percent range. 
Analysts currently expect Coca-Cola to earn 37 cents to 44 cents per share for the third quarter, with a consensus view of 40 cents per share, compared with a profit of 42 cents per share in the year-ago quarter, according to Thomson Financial/First Call.
For the fourth quarter, analysts call for Coke to earn 34 cents to 41 cents per share, with a consensus estimate of 40 cents, compared with last year's fourth-quarter profit of 38 cents. 
Looking at the full year, analysts call for Coke to earn $1.53 to $1.65 per share, with a consensus view of $1.57, up from last year's full-year earnings of $1.44 per share. 
ABN Amro's Swartzberg said Coke's business is accelerating as the company continues to revamp its management and advertising.
"We're seeing that start to pay off, but it's not happening at the pace that Coke thought it would," he said. 
The company did not comment on its outlook for 2002. 
"I think their verbiage was kind of cautious," said Levy.
"They said obviously they're monitoring the global environment, so I think they left a window there to certainly at least adjust 2002 estimates." 
The man who became the third patient to receive with the world's first self-contained artificial heart could be up and walking within days, Texas cardiac surgeons said on Friday. 
Doctors at the Texas Heart Institute at St. Luke's Episcopal Hospital in Houston said the patient was alert and resting comfortably since being implanted with the AbioCor artificial heart during a six-hour operation on Wednesday. 
Lead surgeon
Dr. O.H. Frazier said the patient, whose name is being withheld for 30 days, was expected to be taken off a breathing machine Friday and could be walking next week. 
"It couldn't have gone more smoothly or perfectly from a technical standpoint," said Frazier, who has been working to develop artificial hearts for 15 years.
"This patient would never have left the hospital alive without this effort." 
The titanium and plastic device, made by Abiomed Inc. of Danvers, Mass., is the first major advance in the development of an artificial heart in nearly two decades. 
It has no exterior wires and its outboard battery passes power through the skin without piercing it.
An implanted control device adjusts the motorized heartbeat, and it has an internal, rechargeable 30-minute reserve battery. 
Dr. Reynolds Delgado, the patient's cardiologist, said the man "couldn't walk, he couldn't even speak without gasping for air." 
The purpose of the AbioCor trial is to prove the mechanical heart can keep a patient who was expected to die within 30 days alive for at least 60 days. 
That has been the case with the first man to receive the heart, 59-year-old Robert Tools.
Tools received his on July 2 at Jewish Hospital in Louisville, Ky., and has since taken walks in the park and can change his heart battery. 
The second patient, 70-year-old Tom Christerson, received his implant there on Sept. 13 and is recovering well, his doctors report. 
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has allowed for five of the devices to be implanted in the initial clinical trials. 
Frazier said he did not want to predict a timeline for FDA approval of the AbioCor, but said it would probably take 15-20 successful implantations. 
MGM Mirage ( MGG ) and Sun International Hotels Ltd.
( SIH ) were two of three recipients of online gaming licenses from the Isle of Man, a British possession, positioning the pair to offer online gaming in the United States if and when such gaming is deemed legal. 
The other two licenses went to Littlewood Leisure, a British-based gaming company. 
The awarding of licenses to MGM Mirage and Sun marks the latest move in what has become a quick march toward online gaming in the United States.
The legality of such gaming is a federal issue, which is now being debated in the Congress and federal court system. 
Anticipating a decision that may favor such gaming, Nevada became the nation's first state earlier this year to set up a framework for regulating online gambling. 
State regulatory officials have held forums on the topic, and will eventually draft rules to address such issues as keeping minors from gambling and blocking wagers from being made across state lines in violation of interstate commerce laws. 
"We look forward to operating an Internet gaming site from the Isle of Man because its government has chosen to develop proper licensing and regulation," Terry Lanni, chairman of MGM Mirage, said in a statement. 
He said MGM Mirage plans to move forward "deliberately but cautiously" with its online gaming venture. 
"We intend to work closely with the Isle of Man government and domestic regulatory authorities to develop a safe, secure and enjoyable Internet gaming system which provides satisfactory assurances that Internet wagers are only accepted from jurisdictions in which such activity is legal, that underage gaming is prevented, and that access to problem gamblers is limited." 
MGM Mirage said the number of online gaming sites worldwide is now estimated at more than 1,400, and that online gaming revenues were conservatively estimated at more than $1.5 billion last year. 
Bear Stearns analyst Jason Ader said that both MGM Mirage and Sun International should be able to take advantage of their established brands to market their online products. 
WASHINGTON/KABUL (Reuters) -
U.S fears of unconventional terrorist attacks spread from anthrax and germ warfare to nuclear safety on Thursday when its most famous nuclear power plant was put on top alert as U.S. planes pounded Afghanistan for the 12th day in their war on terrorism. 
Officials later dismissed the threat to Three Mile Island after first calling it "credible," but the incident at the site of the worst nuclear accident in U.S. history jangled nerves already frayed by last month's attacks on New York and Washington and three dozen subsequent cases of anthrax or exposure to the potential germ warfare weapon. 
On the military front, U.S. planes in Afghanistan continued a fierce bombardment of targets of the ruling Taliban, who are sheltering Osama bin Laden, the prime suspect in the Sept. 11 attacks by hijacked airliners that killed nearly 5,400 people. 
A senior Taliban spokesman said between 600 and 900 people had so far been killed, or were missing, in the U.S. strikes. 
On the diplomatic front, President Bush arrived in China for an Asian summit, hoping to shore up support from countries as diverse as China, the world's largest remaining communist country, and Indonesia, the most populous Muslim nation. 
But it was the home front with confirmed cases of the potentially deadly anthrax now standing at six, including a postal worker and an assistant at a third major TV network, as well as the nuclear scare that preoccupied Americans. 
Harrisburg International Airport and Lancaster airport near Three Mile Island nuclear plant in Pennsylvania were shut for four hours.
The plant itself, which was site of the worst U.S nuclear accident in 1979 although there were no casualties, was on top alert for about eight hours. 
"We took the appropriate actions putting the reactor on a heightened state of alert last night following a report from the federal intelligence community of a threat to Three Mile Island," Neil Sheehan, a spokesman for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), said. 
"We no longer consider that threat credible," Sheehan said, adding it was "very specific" to the Three Mile Island facility.
He declined to elaborate. 
Equipment failure at the plant in 1979 caused a loss of cooling water, leading to the partial melting of the uranium fuel and release of a small amount of radioactive material. 
Any attack whether by a hijacked plane or other means on the plant, which has a heavily reinforced containment shell, would presumably seek to release deadly radioactivity into the air. 
Local television stations said temporary flight curbs were put into effect for a 20-mile radius around the airports and military aircraft were sent to protect the plant. 
All 103 U.S. nuclear power reactors, among the most closely guarded facilities in the country, have been on even higher alert after the Sept. 11 attacks on New York's World Trade Center and the Pentagon. 
Although no hard evidence has been found linking anthrax-laced letters to bin Laden, Bush has said there could be a link. 
The government offered a $1 million reward for information leading to the arrest and conviction of those responsible for mailing anthrax, FBI Director Robert Mueller announced. 
The spread of anthrax contamination by letter forced an unprecedented closing of part of U.S. Congress for an environmental safety check on Wednesday and spooked financial markets around the world. 
The Republican-controlled U.S. House of Representatives and all Capitol Hill office buildings closed until Tuesday for anthrax testing, but the Democratic-controlled Senate held a short session under heavy security after 31 congressional staffers tested positive for anthrax exposure. 
The contamination arrived in an anthrax-tainted letter at the office of senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle on Monday. 
The last time there was such a closure was on the day of the September attacks when the Senate also shut down. 
Despite the disruptions of the anthrax scare, congressional leaders said they had reached a compromise agreement on a broad anti-terrorism bill to expand the power of law enforcement to wiretap suspected terrorists, share intelligence information about them and track their Internet movements. 
The two latest cases were confirmed on Thursday. 
A CBS employee who works with TV News anchor Dan Rather in New York tested positive for skin anthrax, making CBS the third major network to be exposed to the disease after NBC and ABC. 
In New Jersey, where two of the anthrax-containing letters were postmarked, a postal worker also tested positive. 
The U.S. Postal Service is taking the extraordinary step of sending notices to every home and office instructing Americans on how to identify and handle suspicious letters and packages. 
But the scare rages on.
More than 60 people in Burlington, Vermont, began antibiotics treatment as a precaution after a powdery substance officials said was not likely anthrax was found on an arriving jet. 
The anthrax scare has spread far beyond U.S. borders. 
Security guards sealed off the mailroom of the lower house of the French parliament, and part of Australia's national parliament was evacuated after powder-laced letters arrived. 
In Nairobi, a letter sent to an unidentified Kenyan businessman tested positive for anthrax.
The letter was posted from Atlanta on Sept. 8 and passed via Miami. 
In Japan, letters containing suspicious powder were delivered to the U.S. consulate in Osaka and three major Japanese newspapers. 
In Afghanistan, the 12th day of air raids went ahead despite appeals from aid agencies for a break to get badly needed food into the country. 
For the first time ever, the United States is flying armed, unmanned drones into combat. "
Predator" spy planes, armed with anti-tank missiles are taking to the skies over Afghanistan, U.S. defense officials said on Thursday. 
The remote-controlled RQ-1 aircraft have been modified by the Air Force to carry two Hellfire missiles.
Defense experts called such a move a first step toward perhaps one day building unmanned, long-range bombers that can carry dozens of missiles and bombs to overseas targets without risking human crews. 
Senior Taliban spokesman Abdul Hai Mutmaen said between 600 and 900 people had so far been killed or were missing. 
"And don't ask me about the number of wounded, because it is in the thousands and I don't have a figure for that," Mutmaen told Qatar's Jazeera television in a videophone interview from an unidentified location. 
Thursday's morning raids hit targets around Kandahar and Jalalabad in the east -- the hub of Afghanistan's notorious guerrilla training camps, witnesses told Reuters. 
At least seven civilians were killed and several injured by exploding ammunition after U.S. warplanes bombed a Taliban munitions dump the north of the capital Kabul, witnesses said. 
But the Taliban, who have denounced the air strikes as a war on Islam, said all their leaders were alive and well and so was their guest bin Laden. 
The military chief of bin Laden's al Qaeda network said Afghans would drag slain U.S. troops through the streets, rekindling memories of the doomed 1993 involvement in Somalia when 18 U.S. members of a U.N. peacekeeping force were killed and mobs dragged some of their bodies through the streets.
"America will only be certain about its mistaken calculations after its soldiers are dragged in Afghanistan as they were in Somalia," Egyptian radical Mohamed Atef, reportedly bin Laden's No. 2, was quoted as saying in a report by the London-based Islamic Observation Center. 
In New York, four followers of bin Laden were sentenced to life in prison without parole for the 1998 bombings of two U.S. embassies in Africa, the first U.S. convictions linked to the Saudi-born militant. 
With Bush keen to ensure global backing for his war on terrorism, latest developments in the Middle East threatened to complicate his task of selling the idea to skeptical Muslims. 
Israel, incensed at Wednesday's assassination of right-wing cabinet minister and former general Rehavam Zeevi, threatened to invoke the war on terrorism to justify attacking the Palestinians if they fail to hand over Zeevi's killers. 
Any flare-up in the Middle East could alienate the very Muslim nations Bush is courting at his meetings in China.
Workers battled underground fires in the ruins of the World Trade Center on Friday, turning to more heavy equipment in an unofficial admission that hope of finding any of the 6,333 missing alive was all but lost. 
The teams working for a 10th day at the rubble of the twin towers were moving from a hunt for survivors to clearing away the massive devastation on the 16-acre site, Fire Commissioner Thomas von Essen said. 
"It's really happening in a normal kind of a transition that I think is acceptable to everybody and the best way for us to get this done," Von Essen said. 
Workers who had been sifting through debris by hand were bringing in more heavy equipment to move the twisted steel and crushed concrete remains of the city's tallest buildings, he told NBC's "Today" show. 
"So much of the concrete and everything else was vaporized or really crushed and pulverized that we need the heavy equipment to move some of the steel," he said. 
While experts say survival is still possible, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani said, "The experts have not dealt with a situation like this before, which is two hundred-story buildings that have been driven deep into the ground that are still partially on fire underground." 
Experienced forest firefighters joined rescue crews to help douse the subterranean blazes that persisted 10 days after the twin 110-story buildings were rammed by two hijacked planes and collapsed in terrifying heaps. 
Workers had hoped to find survivors inside voids within the rubble, but fire officials said the open spaces they had found were too hot from the blazes to have sustained life. 
Workers still combed through the rubble carefully, Giuliani said, in an effort to find human remains, at the least. 
But only 252 people have been confirmed dead, and of those, just 183 have been identified, he said.
The list of the missing remained at 6,333 people, and 6,408 people were reported injured. 
Around the site of the disaster, rescue workers fought off feelings of dejection. 
"I think we all know we are not going to find anyone in there now," one firefighter said.
"I pray we do, we all do, but we are losing hope.
That thing came down so hard." 
Giuliani said a shift to recovery from rescue efforts would not be likely to come in an official announcement. 
"I don't think we'll have to do it that way.
I think what will happen is over a period of time, the emphasis will change," he said. 
Saying that the chance of finding a survivor is "very, very small," he added, "The chance of recovering significant numbers of people who survived is impossible." 
No survivors have been found since Sept. 12, the day after the coordinated strikes at each of the Trade Center towers and the Pentagon outside Washington.
A fourth hijacked airliner crashed in rural Pennsylvania. 
Throughout the surrounding financial district, where the towers were once unforgettable fixtures on the skyline, businesses and restaurants were reopening. 
"We are back, but it is very, very difficult.
There is too much sadness, you can feel it all around," said office worker Carmen Montoya. 
At the New York Stock Exchange, which reopened on Monday after being closed for four days, investors dumped shares for a fifth straight day.
Blue chips logged their biggest weekly loss since the Depression. 
On Friday night, some 400 anti-war protesters gathered under a heavy police presence in Times Square toting placards reading "Resist the War" and chanting, "No more victims, no more violence, no more war." 
As the protesters chanted, one vendor on a Times Square corner did a brisk business selling T-shirts for $10 emblazoned with the image of Osama bin Laden and the words "Dead Man Walking."
Bin Laden is suspected by the United States of having been behind the attacks. 
In the first major sporting event in the city since the attacks, about 35,000 people chanting "USA" attended a Major League Baseball game between the New York Mets and Atlanta Braves.
Mets players wore caps honoring the city's fire department, police and emergency services, the Port Authority police, and state court officers. 
More than 300 firefighters and emergency services workers were among those lost. 
Giuliani, a well-known fan of the Mets' crosstown rivals, the Yankees, attended the game and was greeted by fans' chants of "Rudy!
Rudy!
Rudy!"
The mayor quipped that "things will be back to normal when they boo me again at Shea Stadium." 
Liza Minelli led the crowd in singing "New York, New York" during the seventh-inning stretch. 
Also on Friday night, performers from every corner of the entertainment world -- including Bruce Springsteen, Julia Roberts, U2 and Tom Hanks -- appeared in a two-hour televised benefit for victims of the attacks. 
Former Beatle Paul McCartney said he too was planning a concert to benefit New York firefighters. 
Lleyton Hewitt took revenge on South African Wayne Ferreira by beating him 6-7, 6-3, 6-2 Friday to reach the semifinals of the Stuttgart Masters Series. 
The victory moved the young Australian just two matches away from top spot in the ATP Champions Race. 
Third seed Hewitt, who lost to Ferreira after a five-set thriller in last year's final here, recovered from a nervous start for his quarterfinal victory. 
The U.S. Open champion, now riding a 17-match winning streak dating back to his Grand Slam breakthrough, will knock Brazil's Gustavo Kuerten off the lead in the Race standings if he wins the tournament. 
The 20-year-old, more than ever a serious contender in the battle to finish the year at number one, has already done enough to take second place from American Andre Agassi. 
Both Kuerten and Agassi have made early exits from the $2.95 million event, the eighth of nine Masters Series tournaments and the first one indoors. 
The race for number one should be decided at next month's season-ending Masters Cup in Sydney.
Kuerten, Agassi and Hewitt all stand a chance but the Australian is now many observers' favorite. 
Hewitt goes on to meet local favorite Tommy Haas, who knocked out Britain's Tim Henman 2-6, 6-3, 6-4 in the day's last match. 
Russian Yevgeny Kafelnikov will take on qualifier Max Mirnyi of Belarus in the other semifinal Saturday. 
Kafelnikov advanced with a fairly straightforward 7-5, 6-4 victory over Swede Thomas Enqvist while Mirnyi extended his impressive run with a shock 6-4, 6-2 demolition of troubled former world number one Pete Sampras. 
Henman, the seventh seed, relied on his trademark serve and volley game to take the first set in just 33 minutes but could not resist a brave comeback from the in-form German. 
Henman said: "I think this is one occasion when you've got to say that he deserved it with the way he played in the second and third sets." 
Haas, the 15th seed, who won his third title of the year in Vienna Sunday, left Henman in ninth in the Champions Race and facing a struggle to qualify for the Masters Cup. 
But Henman said: "I always felt it was going to boil down to the last tournament in Paris (starting on Oct. 29) and I still feel the same way.
It's going to be a close-run thing." 
The top seven players in the Race standings will go to Sydney with Wimbledon champion Goran Ivanisevic joining them as a Grand Slam winner. 
Hewitt was leading 5-2 in the first set when he wasted two set points in his match with Ferreira.
The South African, eager to make up for a frustrating season, then broke him to force a tie-break, which he won 7-5. 
But the combative Australian then took control, cruising in the last two sets courtesy of his aggressive baseline play. 
Kafelnikov, who was a finalist in Stuttgart in 1998 but has never won a Masters Series title, survived two set points before using a late break to claim the first set. 
Enqvist, who has not won a tournament this year, briefly gave the impression he could fight his way back when a double fault from his opponent enabled him to level the set at 4-4. 
But Kafelnikov broke back immediately and served for the match, sealing victory after 85 minutes with Enqvist hitting a backhand long on the first match point. 
Mirnyi, who had knocked out Kuerten and Ivanisevic in the previous rounds, then took care of Sampras. 
The powerful 24-year-old had to save six match points on his way to the quarter-finals but had no frights this time, overpowering the American throughout a one-sided contest. 
Sampras, who has not won a title since Wimbledon last year, said a sore arm had prevented him for relying on his usually devastating serve. 
"I had the dead arm," said the seven-times Wimbledon champion, who hinted he might bring his miserable season to an end. 
"I just couldn't serve.
It wasn't fun."
Afghanistan's ruling Taliban said on Saturday they had downed an unmanned spy plane and a helicopter in areas where opposition forces reported sweeping advances. 
Despite earlier contradictory statements, Taliban officials said they had established that their forces had downed a pilotless drone aircraft over Tashkurghan with machinegun fire as well as a helicopter near Dara-i-Suf. 
Both areas are in Samangan, around 150 miles northwest of Kabul, where anti-Taliban commander General Rashid Dostum reported that his force of minority Uzbek fighters had made advances against the Taliban. 
Mystery surrounded the origin of the spy plane, but a spokesman for the opposition Northern Alliance confirmed the helicopter crash -- although blaming it on a mechanical fault. 
"The helicopter seems to have gone down because of technical reasons," said alliance spokesman Mohammad Ashraf Nadeem, adding that the fate of those on board was unknown. 
The Taliban's ambassador in Islamabad, Mullah Abdul Saleem Zaeef, told Reuters the spyplane had been downed while taking pictures over northern Afghanistan. 
Washington frequently uses "drones" to fly observation and spy missions over Iraq, but the aircraft do not generally have defensive capabilities and made up the majority of planes shot down by Baghdad since the Gulf War. 
A Pentagon spokesman in Washington would not comment on the report. 
"It made two or three rounds in the area before being shot down.
It was probably taking pictures," ambassador Zaeef said, adding that it was not badly damaged in the crash. 
He said people who had inspected the downed plane were not aviation experts and could not say if it had any distinctive markings. 
"There is no passenger seat and no pilot's seat," he said. 
With the threat of United States retaliation looming, the Taliban last week declared all Afghan air space off limits, although defense experts say they have little capacity to enforce the ban. 
Both the Taliban and Northern Alliance have a small number of helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft. 
The United States is gearing up for a massive military operation against what it calls an international terrorism network following the devastating attacks on New York and Washington on September 11. 
Saudi-born dissident Osama bin Laden, who lives as a "guest" of Afghanistan's Taliban, is the chief suspect and the United States has vowed to track him down and punish his protectors. 
The area was the scene on Friday of fierce fighting between Taliban fighters and Northern Alliance forces. 
The Taliban control 95 percent of the country, with the opposition holed up in a small northern redoubt. 
Dostum, meanwhile, said he was advancing on the strategic town of Mazar-i-sharif and told Reuters he hoped to take it in the next few days. 
"We are busy fighting," Dostum said by satellite telephone.
"Our advances have been good.
We have taken a lot of their trenches, prisoners and seized a lot of their arms." 
The space shuttle Columbia can complete its 11-day mission to the Hubble Space Telescope despite a faulty coolant line that threatened an early end to the flight, NASA said on Saturday.
A review by ground controllers and mission planners found the problem was stable and there was no reason to believe the orbiter's flight systems might overheat during reentry into Earth's atmosphere, something that could have devastating consequences for the seven astronauts aboard.
"The team decided we could press on with the nominal mission and not make any changes," said Ron Dittemore, the shuttle program manager.
The astronauts were all asleep when the announcement came from Mission Control in Houston, but got the news as soon as they woke up on Saturday evening.
Columbia's mission to the Hubble telescope involves extensive modifications and repairs that should improve its performance tenfold.
has called it one of the most challenging missions ever undertaken by a shuttle crew, and to underscore that, played TV's Mission Impossible theme for the crew's wake-up music.
"Your mission, if you choose to accept it, is to rendezvous and grapple the Hubble Space Telescope and then spend five days massively reoutfitting and upgrading the telescope," Mission Control joked with the astronauts.
With rendezvous just hours away, the astronauts immediately began a crowded timeline that will reach its peak early on Sunday morning when Columbia reaches Hubble after a two-day chase.
Within minutes of liftoff on Friday, NASA discovered a low flow rate in a Freon coolant loop that prevents heat from building up in the orbiter's electronics systems, especially during reentry when temperatures are at their peak.
revealed on Saturday that the flow of Freon through the loop was below the safety margin prescribed by flight rules, but mission managers thought they could bypass the problem by turning off some heat-generating electronics during reentry.
Engineers did not believe there was a leak in the line.
Instead, the most likely culprit was debris that could be clogging a filter.
That debris may have been introduced during a 2 1/2-year, $164 million overhaul Columbia has undergone since it last flew in 1999.
would not speculate what the debris might be.
Astronaut Scott Altman, the mission commander, told reporters during a round of Earth-to-orbit interviews that the crew did not really understand the seriousness of the problem when it was first discovered.
"It got our attention at first, although I thought it might just be a minor problem.
It wasn't apparent right at first just what the impact would be," Altman said.
"We're just hopeful we can square everything away and perform what we came here to space to do."
Columbia is scheduled to rendezvous with the four-story Hubble telescope early on Sunday and astronaut Nancy Currie will use the shuttle's robotic arm to snatch the observatory from its own orbit and secure it to a platform in the shuttle's payload bay.
What follows is five demanding spacewalks on five consecutive days as two teams of astronauts add new solar-power arrays, install a new phone-booth sized imaging camera, repair an existing camera and install a new power control unit with dozens of power couplings to feed all the satellite's systems.
That last task is the real nail-biter because it requires NASA to cut power to the satellite for the first time since it was launched in 1990, and the astronauts will have to remove an old power unit that was not designed to be worked on by astronauts.
If any part of that operation fails, there is a good chance the Hubble would have to be abandoned in space, only to eventually fall to Earth and burn in the atmosphere.
The NFL's plans for the 15 games postponed after the air attacks on New York and Washington will be announced in "the next 24-48 hours," NFL spokesman Greg Aiello said on Tuesday. 
The NFL is debating whether to shorten the season or to make the games up in January.
One possibility is to reduce the number of teams in the playoffs and play regular season games on the wild card weekend of January 5-6. 
The post-season then would begin the following weekend with eight playoff teams instead of 12, with one wild card team from each conference instead of three. 
The players lose one payday if the season is reduced to 15 games, although the San Diego Chargers play a full 16-game schedule since they had a bye in Week Two.
The Arizona Cardinals, with a bye in Week One, play a 14-game schedule. 
"The players want to play 16 games," said Gene Upshaw, the head of the Players Association.
"It's the least disruptive.
If they're asking me what I want, that's what I want.
It would give every team eight home games, eight road games and everything stays intact." 
Commissioner Paul Tagliabue will make the decision after consulting the teams, the Players Association and the league's network partners. 
The players' strike in 1987 marked the last time the season was reduced to 15 games. 
There is no bye week between the conference championship games and the Super Bowl on January 27 in New Orleans. 
The postponements were the first for non-strike reasons in NFL history.
In 1963, the league was criticized for not canceling games immediately following the assassination of President John F. Kennedy. 
Commissioner Pete Rozelle later called it the worst decision in his 29 years in office. 
Australian stocks were softer at the mid-session, mirroring market leader News Corp ( NCP.AX ) on Tuesday by keeping to levels midway between the day's high and its low. 
Market leader News Corp ( NCP.AX ) plunged six percent on Monday here and on Wall Street after quitting talks over the weekend with General Motors ( GM.N ) over GM's satellite business. 
News Corp, which with its preferred stock ( NCPDP.AX ) makes up about 10 percent of Australia's key stocks gauge, shed as much as 2.7 percent in early trade to a low of A$13.30. 
At mid-session, it was 22 cents lower at A$13.45. 
Its bounce from the lows helped halve the benchmark S P/ASX 200 index's .AXJO early losses, lifting it from its 3,232.1 morning trough to 3,241.8, down 14.4 points, or 0.44 percent, as of 2.00 p.m. (0400 GMT). 
Declines here were less pronounced than those in New York, where pessimism over key U.S. economic data due out this week slashed nearly three percent from the Dow Jones Industrial average .DJI
and almost four percent from the Nasdaq .IXIC . 
"People are still pretty nervous, pretty cautious, but they're not panicking over fluctuations in the U.S.," said Lucinda Chan, director of Macquarie Equities. 
"We're taking it all in a very mature fashion," she said. 
Meanwhile News Corp's declines were checked by a view that General Motors, which hammered out a US$25.8 billion deal to sell its Hughes Electronics ( GMH.N ) to News Corp rival EchoStar ( DISH.O ), may have backed the wrong horse, brokers said. 
"The market seems to be toying with the idea that EchoStar won't get all the approvals it needs to buy DirecTV," said Richard Caldwell, senior equities adviser at broker Burdett, Buckeridge and Young. 
"That could play into News Corp's hands by allowing it to come back in at a lower price," he said. 
Bucking the downward trend, publisher John Fairfax Holdings ( FXJ.AX ) jumped as much as three percent on takeover speculation then gave up some gains to stand one cent firmer at A$3.52. 
Banking sources said APN News Media ( APN.AX ), 40-percent controlled by Irish media magnate Tony O'Reilly, will announce a A$700 million capital raising to fund its acquisition of Wilson Horton, also controlled by O'Reilly interests. 
Brokers said the market believes O'Reilly's activity could be a precursor to a bid for Fairfax. 
"Obviously, the market is keen for something to happen there," Macquarie's Chan said. 
Weapons technology developer Metal Storm ( MST.AX ) added 6.5 percent to A$1.30 on the view that the U.S. vow to fight terrorism would enhance existing defence contracts at home and in Washington. 
Australia's only pure defense play has risen 38 percent since September 11, when hijacked aircraft slammed into U.S. landmark buildings on the East Coast.
REUTERS
Federal agents arrested four people in Seattle on charges of trying to obtain fake licenses to drive trucks carrying hazardous materials after a tip from agents in Pittsburgh investigating the hijack attacks on Sept. 11, officials said on Wednesday. 
"They are charged with conspiracy to possess and obtain false and fraudulent identification documents, specifically commercial drivers licenses with a hazardous materials endorsement," said Lawrence Lincoln, spokesman for the U.S. Attorney's office. 
The suspects were identified as Ali Alazawi, 29; Hussain Sudani, 33; Haider Al Tamimi, 28; and Mustafa Al-Aboody, 29. 
Local television reported the suspects paid a middleman $350 each for a Pennsylvania license to haul hazardous materials without taking the test. 
On Tuesday U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft said some suspects that may be connected to the hijackings had sought licenses to transport hazardous materials, chemicals, waste or other potentially dangerous substances. 
Federal officials on Sept. 20 arrested Nabil Al-Marabh, a former Boston cab driver with a license to haul hazardous materials in Michigan, saying he was on a list of nearly 200 suspects and potential witnesses wanted for questioning on the Sept. 11 attacks. 
The U.S. Attorney in Seattle had no other information on where the suspects lived or where they were born, but said that their appearance in federal court was delayed until Thursday to give time to find Arabic-speaking translators. 
News reports said the suspects had been taken to a federal detention center south of Seattle. 
An FBI spokeswoman said investigators will probe for any links to the hijackers who crashed four jets in the United States on Sept. 11, including one that slammed into the western Pennsylvania hills. 
"Right now there is no information that links these people to any terrorist activities.
It's information that came to us through the terrorist investigation, but we are getting a wide range of information on all kinds of violations through this investigation," FBI spokeswoman Robbie Burroughs told Reuters. 
"We will certainly be looking to see if there are any links (to the terrorists), but at this time there isn't any," she added. 
Shares in U.S. aircraft manufacturer Lockheed Martin Corp. ( LMT.N ) surged in Europe to trade 14 percent above Friday's U.S. close, after the company won a major U.S. contract to build fighter jets. 
Dealers said shares of Boeing Co. ( BA.N ), which lost out in the deal, were down about seven percent from Friday's close. 
Lockheed shares traded on the Instinet electronic brokerage at $57.00, up from their regular close of $49.92 and up from $52.00 in after-hours trading on Wall Street on Friday.
Dealers said they eased back after their initial urge, and at 1100 GMT Lockheed stock was hovering at $56.60.
Trading had been heavy. 
The U.S. Defense Department said late Friday it had picked Lockheed to build a new Joint Strike Fighter, in what promises to be the richest defense contract ever. 
Lockheed beat Boeing Co. ( BA.N ) in the contest to build the next-generation fighter jet for an estimated contract value of well over $200 billion, if all planned orders are filled. 
Boeing shares fell to $35.00 in after-hours trading on Friday and continued to hover around that level in Europe, down from their regular close of $37.68. 
Dealers said there was limited activity for other U.S. shares in Europe. 
U.S. stock futures contracts dipped, as major European indices slipped and investors were worried key U.S. economic and corporate reports this week will be weak. 
The S P 500 December futures contract was down 5 points at 1,097 points. 
Shares in energy trading giant Enron Corp. ( ENE.N ) traded at $15.75, from a close of $15.50, after the Wall Street Journal reported Enron is negotiating with banks for a new credit line of between $1 billion and $2 billion. 
General Motors Corp ( GM.N ) and EchoStar Communications Corp ( DISH.O ) were untraded, despite the weekend news that GM had sold its satellite television unit for $26 billion to EchoStar. 
EchoStar is offering cash and shares to buy Hughes Electronics Corp
GMH.N. , which will give it a U.S. pay television behemoth covering over 16.7 million subscribers or 17 percent of the U.S. market. 
Technology stocks showed little movement away from Friday's closing prices.
One dealer said Microsoft ( MSFT.O ) nudged 10 cents above its $62.20 close, while Cisco Systems ( CSCO.O ) and Intel Corp. ( INTC.O ) were both down 5 cents from their close.
REUTERS REUTERS
Intel Corp.
INTC.O on Monday said it has been operating a one-stop shop for chip designers seeking to bring their product to market quickly and at a lower cost, by managing the chip making process for clients from concept to final product. 
Intel, the world's largest chip maker, will utilize factories in Asia owned by companies such as Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. Ltd.
2330.TW , and rely in part on its own experience in chip design and project management. 
The business, called Intel Microelectronics Services, has operated for more than a year but had not been formally announced by Intel before Monday. 
Intel Microelectronics is not the first to offer complete chip outsourcing services -- LSI Logic Corp.
LSI.N is one well-known provider -- but it is likely to make a major impact in the emerging market for such services. 
Traditionally, semiconductor companies that lack their own production equipment have hired a factory to manufacture custom-designed chips, and other companies to package the chips, said Needham & Co. analyst Dan Scovel. 
Intel's service would let companies submit a design or concept and await a finished product within months.
Intel would be able to handle -- either on its own or with partners -- design, testing, packaging, and manufacturing. 
"Basically, what we're trying to do is give our customers the flexibility to choose the process that best suits their plans," Intel spokesman Manny Vara said. 
But Scovel questioned whether Intel's strengths in the computer processor business are well suited for a foray into the outsourcing services business. 
"They're not going to get the advantage of what they do well in the PC space," Scovel said, referring to Intel's strength in manufacturing PC microprocessors, the brains that run personal computers. 
"There's a huge service-oriented commitment, a lot of customer hand holding," he added. 
SG Cowen listed Amkor Technology Inc.
AMKR.O as one of the firms that will benefit from providing chip testing and packaging for the new business.
The firm also listed chip design services company Synopsys Inc. SNPS.O as a beneficiary. 
Shares of Intel climbed $2.01 to close at $21.31 on Nasdaq, while the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite Index .IXIC rose more than 5 percent.
Synopsys stock rose $2.57 to $39.61, and shares of Amkor rose 30 cents to $11.65. 
The U.S. ambassador to Israel urged Palestinian President Yasser Arafat Monday to do more to crack down on militants and repeated a U.S. call for Israeli forces to withdraw from reoccupied Palestinian areas. 
Ambassador Dan Kurtzer made clear that Arafat was under U.S. pressure to take tougher action against Palestinian militant groups that Washington has added to a list of "terrorist organizations" subject to tight financial controls. 
Kurtzer made his comments three days after U.S. Deputy Assistant Secretary of State David Satterfield created diplomatic waves with a statement that the Palestinian uprising had turned into a process of "calculated terror." 
"What these various phenomena represent is an effort on our part to be more persuasive with Chairman Arafat, that he needs to make decisions with respect to where he stands on questions related to terrorism," Kurtzer told a Tel Aviv news conference. 
The United States is seeking to calm the conflict to help bolster Arab support for military strikes on Afghanistan following the Sept. 11 attacks on Washington and New York. 
But many Palestinians argue that they cannot be expected to end guerrilla activity while they remain under Israeli military occupation and Jewish settlements are set up on Arab territory in contravention of international law. 
Kurtzer said Israel, where some have felt slighted by U.S. efforts to court Arab and Muslim states, was regarded as a member of the anti-terror alliance though it has sent no troops. 
He suggested, however, that Israel may have a military role to play in the future.
"There may be a stage at some other point in the international effort against terrorism where that becomes appropriate, but it isn't at this stage," he said. 
Kurtzer said Washington held to its position that Israel should remove its forces from Palestinian-ruled territory seized last month following the assassination of a Cabinet minister. 
The right-wing minister was killed in retaliation for the killing of a Palestinian guerrilla official. 
"It's been our view that the right of self-defense, which Israel certainly has and no one challenges, should not be exercised with incursions into (Palestinian-ruled areas)," he said, predicting Israeli forces would withdraw in a few days. 
Kurtzer called on Arafat to "act against the (militant) organizations themselves, to shut them down, to arrest those responsible for acts of terror, to prosecute those people."
He said efforts must also be made to cut off their funds. 
Arafat has insisted his security forces have been rounding up militants acting against Palestinian national interests.
Israeli officials have said he has done virtually nothing to rein in the radicals. 
The State Department last Friday added the militant Palestinian organization Hamas to its list of "terrorist organizations" that should be subjected to tight financial controls. 
Hamas has killed dozens of Israelis in attacks in the past 13 months of Israeli-Palestinian bloodshed. 
Israel has justified its recent incursions in the West Bank as a drive to capture militants it blames for a wave of bombings. 
Palestinians have accused Israel of trying to topple Arafat.
But Kurtzer said that was not Israel's position and that the United States would oppose any effort to "delegitimize" Arafat. 
He played down expectations about a new U.S. peace initiative, but said Washington was considering whether to lay out its views publicly on the Middle East situation. 
Kurtzer said he was not aware of any plans for President Bush to hold his first talks with Arafat at the U.N. General Assembly meeting later this month, though he said such a meeting could not be ruled out. 
He said Israel had made clear "its position that it would prefer that a meeting (with Arafat) not take place."
The new judge overseeing the Microsoft Corp.
MSFT.O antitrust case on Friday ordered intensive settlement talks between the company and the government ahead of hearings on possible sanctions against the software giant. 
U.S. District Court Judge Colleen Kollar-Kotelly told a status hearing with the parties that the settlement talks should proceed "24 hours a day, seven days a week" until a deadline on Nov. 2. 
If the two sides have not reached a deal by Oct. 12, Kollar-Kotelly said she will appoint a mediator to try to speed up a conclusion to the three-year court battle. 
"The court cannot emphasize too strongly the importance of making these efforts to settle the cases and resolve the parties' differences in this time of rapid national change," Kollar-Kotelly wrote in the order issued after the hearing. 
If no settlement emerges by Nov. 2, Kollar-Kotelly said she expects hearings starting March on what sanctions should apply to prevent future violations of antitrust law by Microsoft. 
The judge rejected Microsoft's request to narrow the scope of those possible remedies, saying she has "large discretion" to design a remedy. 
Microsoft stock closed up $1.21 at $51.17 on the Nasdaq market. 
The case returned to the district court after an appeals court in June agreed that Microsoft had illegally maintained its monopoly in personal computer operating systems. 
But the appellate judges rejected breaking the company in two as proposed by the original trial judge Thomas Penfield Jackson. 
Legal experts said Kollar-Kotelly was pushing the parties hard toward settlement. 
"Both sides need to face the reality that this is probably their last best chance to craft something that's not imposed by the courts," said Andy Strenio, an antitrust lawyer with Powell, Goldstein, Frazier & Murphy.
"That's a risky roll of the dice -- to leave it in the hands of the judiciary." 
Citing court precedent, Kollar-Kotelly said it would be a mistake to put limits on the possible remedies until she has heard all the evidence.
"It would obviate the usefulness of an evidentiary hearing," the judge said. 
She also swatted down Microsoft's suggestion that the remedies should be limited to only those specific acts that have been deemed illegal. 
Most of the original case against Microsoft focused on the tactics the company used to drive rival Netscape Communications Corp. out of the market for Internet browsers. 
However, some of the states have said the final remedy should thwart any future anticompetitive behavior by Microsoft using its latest products. 
They have expressed particular concern about how the company's new Windows XP operating system will affect competition.
Windows XP is packed with new software features that rival companies now offer separately. 
Government attorneys have said they will ask the judge to impose broad restrictions on Microsoft's business tactics that would be modeled after a set of interim sanctions handed down last year by Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson, who was the trial court judge in the case at the time. 
The interim remedy cited by the government would, among other things, require the company to give outside software developers greater access to the Windows source code, the basic programming instructions for its software. 
But with Windows XP due to be released in a matter of weeks, the company's lead attorney, Dan Webb, told Kollar-Kotelly that Microsoft was very concerned about competitors getting access to the Windows source code. 
"It would be devastating to Microsoft to have that happen," Webb said. 
Iran has agreed to help U.S. military personnel in the relatively unlikely event they end up in distress in Iran during operations in neighboring Afghanistan, a State Department official said on Tuesday. 
"We indicated that if this event ... were to occur, we would be looking for this kind of reaction from them and they indicated 'Yes, that's fine'," said the senior official, who asked not to be named. 
He was referring to a New York Times report that Iran showed willingness to help in a message sent on Oct. 8, in response to a message from the Bush administration the day before. 
Iran and the United States usually communicate with each other through the Swiss embassy in Tehran, which represents U.S. interests there in the absence of diplomatic relations. 
Another State Department official, who also asked not to be named, said the Iranian offer meant a fairly low level of cooperation with the United States in its war on the al Qaeda organization of Osama bin Laden in Afghanistan.
"They would do the same in the case of a shipwreck," he added. 
Iran has criticized the U.S. bombing of Afghanistan and has not allowed U.S. planes to use its airspace. 
Iranian assistance could arise if, for example, a U.S. pilot in trouble had to make an emergency landing and did not want to land in territory controlled by the Taliban, who are also targets in the U.S. bombing campaign. 
State Department spokesman Philip Reeker declined to discuss diplomatic contacts with Iran but said that a positive Iranian role in the U.S. campaign against terrorism would "contribute to our goal of promoting peace and stability." 
"That said, the U.S. and Iran continue to have serious and long-standing policy differences with each other...
Our policy toward Iran has not changed," he added. 
The United States calls Iran a "state sponsor of terrorism" because of its support for Lebanese and Palestinian groups fighting Israeli occupation of Arab land.
Iran says the groups are waging a legitimate struggle. 
They also differ over Iranian opposition to U.S. diplomacy in the Arab-Israeli conflict and U.S. allegations, denied by Tehran, that Iran is trying to develop nuclear weapons. 
Iran, because of suspicions dating back to the Islamic revolution of 1979, is the only country in the world to turn down U.S. requests for a government-to-government dialogue. 
It has repeatedly rebuffed U.S. overtures, most recently when the Bush administration interpreted Iranian condemnation of "terrorism" and of the Sept. 11 attacks on New York and Washington as a sign that Iran was willing to cooperate. 
Asked if the United States was adjusting its attitude toward Iran and terrorism, Reeker said: "Everything that we've said in our Patterns of Global Terrorism (the annual State Department report) is exactly as that stands." 
"What we've said from here many times, is that countries have an opportunity to change." 
Reeker also denied the Bush administration was courting favor with Iran when it went to court on Monday to argue against a claim for compensation by 52 Americans who were held hostage at the U.S. Embassy in Tehran after the revolution. 
The hostages argue they can claim compensation from Iran under the 1996 Anti-Terrorism Act. 
The State Department argues that the Algiers Accords of 1981, which brought the hostage crisis to an end, prevent the embassy hostages from suing the Iranian government for compensation for their captivity. 
"We're simply complying with U.S. law with our obligations under an international agreement," Reeker said. 
"This has absolutely no connection to the war on terrorism, and it was after reviewing the court papers for the case that we realized that ...
the United States government was obligated to take action to comply with the international agreement under the Algiers accords," he added.
Confirmation that two Washington postal workers died from inhaled anthrax and word of another suspected case of the deadliest form of the disease in New Jersey prompted U.S. authorities to scramble on Tuesday to protect against further attacks. 
Health authorities in Washington were investigating at least 16 other suspicious cases in the wave of bioterrorism the White House said on Tuesday it suspected may be linked to the Sept. 11 attacks on the United States.
Preliminary tests at a remote White House mail facility also turned up evidence of anthrax but none was found at the executive mansion. 
A postal worker at a New Jersey facility that processed anthrax-laden letters sent to Congress and NBC News became the latest suspected case of anthrax inhalation. 
The middle-aged woman, who became ill last week, was the first person in New Jersey to show signs of contracting the more deadly inhalation form of anthrax, a possible germ warfare agent. 
Tests confirmed on Tuesday that the two postal workers from Washington's Brentwood facility died from anthrax inhalation.
The center, which also tested positive for anthrax, processes mail for the U.S. Capitol and other Washington areas.
A supermarket tabloid photo editor, Bob Stevens, died in Florida earlier this month from anthrax inhalation. 
All employees at the military facility where mail for the White House is screened, several miles from 1600 Pennsylvania Ave., were also being tested for exposure to anthrax after spores were discovered. 
But officials were confident anthrax had not made it through to the White House and all tests at the complex surrounding the executive mansion had come up negative. 
Confronting the troubling developments, health and postal officials responded to suggestions they were too slow to test postal workers when it became known an anthrax-laced letter they had sorted at Brentwood turned up in the office of Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle. 
Capitol Hill staff were tested immediately last week for the deadly bacteria and 28 were found to have been exposed.
It took five days before mass testing began on postal workers. 
U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Tommy Thompson promised to act faster to protect people, moving to test and treat anyone who may have been exposed to even a hint of anthrax. 
Thompson said officials would also be watching for smallpox, tularemia or rabbit fever, plague, botulinum toxin and viruses that cause a range of hemorrhagic fevers. 
"We are going to err on the side of caution in making sure people are protected," Thompson told lawmakers at a hearing held at his own HHS headquarters because congressional offices remained closed to sweep for anthrax contamination. 
Thompson said his department was also meeting with postal officials to come up with ways to make mailrooms safer. 
Experts said they could not have predicted that inhaled anthrax was a risk for the postal workers, thinking they were more likely to contract the less deadly anthrax skin infection, which is easy to treat with antibiotics. 
A total of 12 people have been confirmed infected with anthrax in the United States, including the three who died from inhaled anthrax in Washington and Florida, and six cases of skin anthrax in New York and New Jersey. 
Washington Department of Health chief Dr. Ivan Walks said aside from two confirmed inhalation patients in the capital, there were four more cases that were listed as suspicious for anthrax and 12 other "low suspicion" cases. 
But finding inhalation anthrax a week after the letter arrived on Capitol Hill was forcing health officials to rethink how they respond to reports of bacteria-tainted letters. 
Mike Osterholm, a bioterror expert at the University of Minnesota, said officials may have to act more quickly to close off areas and give out antibiotics when anthrax is found. 
Inhalation anthrax kills 90 percent of victims and by the time they are seriously ill, it is too late to treat them.
But quick use of antibiotics can combat the disease. 
New Jersey health officials expanded from seven to 10 days the preventive course of antibiotic treatment prescribed for about 1,000 permanent employees at two affected facilities.
They also said treatment would now include workers who only visit the main distribution center. 
The New Jersey processing and distribution postal facility in Hamilton Township handled the anthrax-contaminated letters sent on Sept. 18 to NBC News anchor Tom Brokaw, whose assistant tested positive for skin anthrax, and the Sept. 17 letter to Daschle. 
Walks said Washington officials also had dramatically expanded the number of people to get antibiotics to include all people at Brentwood and at 36 related post offices. 
Everyone who visited Brentwood, including the mayor and others at a news conference there last week, would be given the antibiotic Cipro, the treatment of choice for anthrax. 
Mayor Anthony Williams said the authorities were doing the best they could. 
"If we knew then what we know now we would have acted earlier," said Williams, when asked why it had taken such a long time to test and treat postal workers. 
Deborah Willhite, a U.S. Postal Service senior vice president, said the problem would be handled differently from now on. 
Postal workers were asking for and receiving gloves and masks, and lawmakers returned to work in the U.S. Capitol while their offices remained closed pending final results of tests for anthrax contamination. 
Aides reported that the buildings that tested positive for anthrax were likely to stay shut for weeks and would be flooded with gas to clean up the deadly bacteria. 
A spokeswoman for the Postal Service in Chicago said authorities nationally were reevaluating programs often used by children -- from pen pals to letters to Santa Claus. 
"We are going over procedures to make (them) more safe and secure," the spokeswoman said. 
FBI investigators also were fanned out across the country searching for those responsible. 
Attorney General John Ashcroft said he planned to release copies of the letters sent to Brokaw and Daschle and the envelope of another letter sent to the New York Post newspaper to help alert citizens about what to look for. 
Ashcroft said he was unable to say whether the anthrax incidents were linked to the Sept. 11 hijackings of four planes that crashed into the World Trade Center, the Pentagon and in Pennsylvania, killing more than 5,000 people. 
But House of Representatives Democratic leader Richard Gephardt said after a meeting with President Bush that "we all suspect" a link between the plane attacks and the wave of anthrax cases. 
White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said, "There is a suspicion that this is connected to international terrorists.
Our nation is under attack as a result of these mailings."
Flower and gift retailer
1-800-FLOWERS.COM Inc. FLWS.O on Wednesday said it reduced its losses from a year ago as online sales grew 27 percent while other revenue streams dipped or were flat. 
The company reported a loss of $8.95 million, or 14 cents a share in its fiscal first quarter ended Sept. 30, compared with a loss of $22.5 million, or 35 cents a share a year ago.
Analysts had been expecting a loss of 16 cents a share, according to Thomson Financial/First Call. 
Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) was a loss of $5.9 million compared with an EBITDA loss of $19.1 million a year ago.
The company expects to swing to an EBITDA gain of $4.5 million to $5 million next quarter with profits of about 2 cents to 3 cents a share, in line with analyst forecasts of 2 cents a share. 
Revenues for 1-800-FLOWERS.COM are expected to grow in a range of 25 percent to 28 percent next quarter to $168 million to $172 million.
For the year, the company said it expects revenue growth of 16 percent to 20 percent with EBITDA of $8 million to $10 million. 
Shares of 1-800-FLOWERS.COM closed at $11.25 on Tuesday on the Nasdaq.
A Web site which reputedly first brought together children's television icon Bert of "Sesame Street" fame and the world's most wanted man, Osama bin Laden, has been shut down by its creator. 
The site, operated by a Dutch man who identifies himself on his site only as "J-roen," carried the following message on Friday: "Due to the great amount of comments (both positive and negative) since a picture from this Web site was recently featured in a collage poster, I have decided to take this section of the site offline." 
The author did not respond to e-mails seeking comment. 
On the site was a spoof photo of Bert the Muppet appearing beside bin Laden, the prime suspect in the September 11 jetliner hijacking attacks in the United States. 
The image apparently was downloaded off the Internet along with other images of bin Laden and arranged together on to a montage placard. 
The placards have become a top seller on the streets of Bangladesh over the past week with anti-American protestors hoisting them at rallies.
Photojournalists covering the demonstrations unwittingly captured the images and circulated them to newspapers and news Web sites. 
The posters showing a tiny Bert tucked between two images of bin Laden were held by seemingly unsuspecting demonstrators at rallies on October 5 and 9. 
John van der Lingen, an administrator for the Amsterdam-based Web firm that hosts the site, www.j-roen.net, said the site had received a record number of visitors in the past two days as media from around the world have reported on the satirical contribution to the war effort. 
"J-roen" has become something of an overnight celebrity this week courtesy of his Web site. 
The Bert-bin Laden duo was first spotted by Internet users earlier this week and the hunt was on to find the creator. 
On the Internet, Bert has become a celebrated parodied figure.
A San Francisco-based artist created a "Bert is Evil" Web site in the mid 1990s.
It shows the crabby, banana-shaped Muppet with famous figures throughout history. 
The artist Dino Ignacio grew tired of the site in 1998 and stopped working on it.
But the momentum has carried on. 
Doctored photos of Bert appearing with Hitler and now bin Laden appear on spoof sites across the Internet.
Ignacio has denied being the creator of Bert and bin Laden. 
Sesame Workshop, the New York-based creators of "Sesame Street," issued a statement on Thursday saying it would explore legal options "to stop this abuse or any similar abuses in the future."
Israeli tanks rumbled out of Palestinian-ruled Ramallah on Wednesday, signaling an end to the two-week-old reoccupation of parts of the West Bank city which had drawn sharp international criticism. 
Tanks, armored personnel carriers and jeeps moved through the streets of northern Ramallah under the cover of darkness in the early hours of Wednesday morning, residents said. 
Residents of the Ramallah districts occupied by Israeli forces had been under curfew throughout most of the occupation.
But they braved rain and wind to watch the pullout begin at around 1:00 a.m. 
There were no immediate reports of a withdrawal from Palestinian-ruled areas in the western part of Ramallah, but Israeli military sources said troops would be taken out of the city throughout the night. 
The sources said they expected the pullout to end shortly before dawn on Wednesday. 
Ramallah was one of six West Bank cities partially reoccupied by Israel after radical Palestinians assassinated a far-right Israeli cabinet minister on October 17 in revenge for Israel's slaying of its leader. 
Under heavy international pressure, Israel pulled its troops out of Bethlehem and neighboring Beit Jala last week and left the Palestinian-ruled city of Qalqilya on Monday after reaching what it said were truce agreements with local commanders. 
Israel's Defense Ministry said the army would maintain its stranglehold around Ramallah after the withdrawal. 
Raanan Gissin, an aide to Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, said Israel would withdraw from all the Palestinian-ruled cities once the Palestinian Authority agreed to prevent militants from launching attacks against Israelis from these areas. 
He said Israel would abandon the tactic of large-scale military raids in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. 
Israel's military incursions have drawn criticism from its closest ally, the United States, which is keen to end 13 months of Israeli-Palestinian fighting to bolster Arab and Islamic support for its anti-terror coalition. 
Five Palestinians were killed in the West Bank on Tuesday in fresh violence, including three gunmen who the Palestinian Authority said had been "executed" by Israeli forces after they were wounded in an exchange of fire. 
The army said the three died in a gun battle in which an Israeli army officer was also killed. 
Palestinians also accused Israel of booby-trapping a car which blew up in the West Bank city of Jenin on Tuesday, killing two activists in President Yasser Arafat's Fatah faction.
Israel said a bomb the men were preparing exploded prematurely. 
At least 697 Palestinians and 186 Israelis have been killed since a Palestinian revolt against Israeli occupation began in September 2000 after a deadlock in peace negotiations. 
Gissin said the military would abandon the tactic of large-scale military operations, which has drawn world wrath, and instead adopt what he described as guerrilla tactics, or "pinpoint operations.
" 
"The method of operation is going to change," Gissin said.
"We will be using when necessary guerrilla warfare against terrorism rather than large-scale forces moving into the area." 
"I believe that the use of the sort of incursions that we used with large forces has exhausted itself," he said. 
Israel has come under international criticism for what it calls its "targeted killings" of individual Palestinian militants, well-planned surprise attacks which Palestinians call assassinations. 
Gissin added that since the incursion into the West Bank began, Israeli forces arrested 35 of the "most wanted" Palestinian militants from Palestinian-ruled areas and prevented 15 Palestinians from infiltrating into Israel to carry out attacks. 
Sharon said in a speech on Monday that Israel was changing its methods of confronting violence in the Palestinian uprising against Israeli occupation, but did not to elaborate. 
Soldiers still remain in and around areas of the West Bank cities of Tulkarm and Jenin.
Hilton Hotels Corp.
HLT.N said on Monday it will proceed with most planned hotel maintenance and construction next year, despite the sharp travel drop-off in the two weeks since the Sept. 11 air attacks. 
"Since we are running our company with an expectation that business will return to 1998-99 levels after a difficult period of eight to 12 weeks, it is important that we continue to maintain our hotels in the best condition for our guests and customers, and complete significant projects that are already well under way," Hilton chief executive Stephen Bollenbach said in a statement. 
Specifically, Hilton said it will proceed on schedule with $170 million in planned hotel maintenance and technology spending in 2002. 
It also said that $40 million in significant renovation projects now underway will be completed as scheduled, including renovations at Hiltons in San Francisco, New Orleans, Cleveland and Salt Lake City. 
It said it will continue with $25 million in several other projects, but has decided to postpone two previously announced vacation-ownership properties in Las Vegas and Orlando. 
The announcement came in contrast to plans by rival Starwood Hotels & Resorts Worldwide Inc.
HOT.N , which said it is putting millions of dollars in similar projects on hold in an effort to preserve cash until the industry's future direction is clearer. 
Bollenbach has been critical of proposals by some in the hotel industry to put together a government-funded support package after U.S. airlines won $15 billion for their troubled sector. 
Other top hotel executives were scheduled to meet on Tuesday with U.S. Commerce Secretary Don Evans in Washington to discuss the state of the $582 billion U.S. tourism industry. 
Hong Kong stocks are expected to rise on Tuesday following a Wall Street rally inspired by upbeat corporate earnings and hopes that lower interest rates and government stimulus packages will kickstart the flagging U.S. economy. 
The technology-heavy Nasdaq composite index .IXIC jumped 2.2 percent while the blue-chip Dow Jones industrial average .DJI climbed 1.88 percent. 
The two indices were boosted by positive results from companies like 3M, Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Co
( MMM.N ), which makes Scotch tape and Post-It notes. 
"This will push the HSI up by between 100 and 200 points," said Conita Hung, head of research at Mansion House. 
Analysts also said China's top cellular carriers China Mobile ( 0941.HK ) and China Unicom ( 0762.HK ) are also likely to rise. 
The benchmark Hang Seng index .HSI ended 0.29 percent, or 28.30 points, lower at 9,797.54 points.
It is about six percent below its level on September 11 before the attacks on New York and Washington, and off over 35 percent for the year to date. 
China Mobile edged up 1.14 percent to HK$22.10 on news that its subscribers grew 8.2 percent in the third quarter. 
China Unicom, however, fell 3.38 percent to HK$7.15, as institutional investors remained worried about rising competition on the mainland. 
Analysts said HSBC Holdings ( 0005.HK ), Hong Kong's largest bank and the Hang Seng's biggest constituent by market capitalisation, is like to stage a mild rebound as it had been under selling pressure lately. 
"It won't be a strong rebound because some institutional funds are still underweight on it because of earnings fears," said Hung. 
The stock fell 1.51 percent to HK$81.75 on Monday, but HSBC Holdings gained 2.54 percent in London overnight. 
H-shares, or shares of Chinese-incorporated companies listed in Hong Kong, are also likely to be in focus after China's stock market regulators halted a selldown of state holdings in listed companies through IPOs and additional share offerings. 
This will clear the overhang of the yuan-denominated A-shares in the market and likely boost prices, although analysts said A-shares, which are not open to foreigners, were already too expensive. 
"The A-share market has to go down, they're overvalued and it's good to sell as much state-owned shares as possible," said Andrew To, sales director at Tai Fook Securities.
REUTERS
The number of Americans lining up for first-time jobless benefits reached its highest level in more than nine years last week as U.S. labor markets, already hurt by a sinking economy, suffered a fresh blow from the Sept. 11 attacks on the United States. 
The Labor Department said on Thursday early data showed an 11,000 rise in claims just in New York, the state hit hardest after hijacked planes slammed into the World Trade Center, collapsing buildings and shutting down stock markets for days. 
Several days of grounded airline flights followed by substantial cutbacks in flights also contributed to increased jobless claims among auto workers in Michigan, where companies were unable to have needed parts delivered from Canada. 
The dismal job market news further darkens the picture for the world's richest economy, which may already have been heading toward recession before the attacks.
A separate report released on Thursday showed a third monthly decline in orders for long-lasting manufactured goods in August. 
"It's going to be a very difficult period and it's going to be hardest on workers.
Jobs are already being cut and the disruption of the economy is very significant," said Mark Zandi, economist at Economy.
Com in West Chester, Pa. 
The soft economy is going to eat into government surpluses as well, the Congressional Budget Office said on Thursday as it cut its fiscal 2001 estimate of the government surfeit by $32 billion to $121 billion. 
In its latest report, the Labor Department said the number of initial jobless claims rose by 58,000 to 450,000 for the week ended Sept. 22, the highest level since July 1992 when the United States was emerging from its last recession. 
U.S. Treasury bonds rose for a third straight session as the weak jobless data cemented expectations for another Federal Reserve interest rate cut next week. 
So far this year, the Fed has cut interest rates eight times to help prop up the economy and many economists expect them to lower borrowing costs again by at least 25 basis points when policymakers meet next week. 
Stocks slipped at midday, with the blue chip Dow Jones industrial average shedding 78 points, or 0.92 percent, and the high-tech Nasdaq composite off 44 points or nearly 3 percent. 
Last week's rise in claims was well above Wall Street expectations and added to the economic uncertainty expected over the next several weeks as more workers nationwide lose their jobs because of the attacks. 
"One of the biggest economic uncertainties is whether the ongoing layoffs will mushroom and spread," said Sung Won Sohn, chief economist at Wells Fargo. 
"Clearly the Sept. 11 attack is having a pronounced effect on employment.
Airlines alone have laid off tens of thousands of people and there is probably more to come." 
The department said that increased joblessness in the latest data was reported in other states around the country and would likely continue for several weeks.
Since the attacks, the aviation industry alone has laid off roughly 100,000 workers. 
The U.S. government has pledged $5 billion in direct aid and $10 billion in loan guarantees to keep airlines flying. 
But Zandi and others agree that tax cuts and other policy moves, including higher government spending and more interest rate cuts, could help the country rebound from a recession, commonly defined as six months of economic contraction. 
Within a few days of the hijack attacks, Congress approved a $40 billion emergency package to fund counter-terrorism and recovery efforts and lawmakers from both political parties have indicated they expect even more government stimulus. 
"The economy is in recession.
It was slammed by the terrorist attack two weeks ago
but I think with a bit of luck and some deft policymaking the economy could be firming up by early next year," Zandi said. 
U.S. military action could also help boost consumer confidence and spending, a key underpinning for the economy.
"It's very much a function of what happens militarily and in the global political arena," he said, warning that another terrorist attack would be "debilitating" for the economy. 
Analysts in a Reuters poll forecast, on average, that initial claims would rise to 429,000.
The four-week moving average, considered a more reliable gauge of employment condition because it irons out weekly fluctuations, rose to 422,000 from 410,250, remaining well above the key 400,000 level analysts closely watch. 
New orders for costly manufactured goods declined for a third straight month in August, the Commerce Department reported in a report that underlined how weak the economy was even before the devastating attacks on Sept. 11. 
The value of new durable goods orders fell 0.3 percent to $180.83 billion after larger drops of 1.1 percent in July and 2.5 percent in June.
Durables are items like new cars, computers and appliances designed to last three years or more. 
Commerce officials said it was the first time in more than two years -- since the period from April-June 1999 -- that orders had fallen for three months in a row.
Shipments, a gauge of current activity on the factory floor, also softened for a third consecutive month, down 1.2 percent in August following declines of 0.2 percent in July and 2.4 percent in June. 
"The world had changed over the past two weeks
and I think businesses are retrenching along with consumers," Economy.
Com's Zandi said. 
German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder's Social Democrats emerged as clear victors in the Berlin city election on Sunday, while his main opposition, the conservative Christian Democrats, suffered a stinging defeat. 
The vote gives Schroeder a major boost 11 months before the next general election.
It reaffirms his mounting popularity as a result of tough security measures implemented in response to the September 11 hijack assaults on the U.S. 
The conservative Christian Democrats suffered a big blow that could eventually prove fatal for their embattled national leader Angela Merkel. 
Commentators said it has probably thwarted her bid to challenge Schroeder for the chancellorship next year, paving the way for Bavarian Premier Edmund Stoiber to become the party's champion in the general election. 
"The snipers will be out for her tomorrow," ZDF television said in a commentary. 
But some analysts cautioned that not too much should be read into the Berlin election, which has been distorted by security scares and the debate over the U.S. military response to the attacks. 
Hundreds of extra police have been deployed and miles of barriers put up to protect embassies and public buildings, changing the face of Berlin more than any other German city. 
By next year's election, the weakness of the German economy will have returned to the fore in voters' minds, analysts say.
Some forecasts put unemployment above four million, well above Schroeder's pledge when he took office. 
The Social Democrats rose about seven points in Berlin from the last vote in October 1999 to 29.7 percent, according to official results with 97.4 percent of votes counted. 
Preliminary final results are expected around 2200 GMT. 
The Christian Democrats (CDU), fell about 17 points to 23.6 percent, one of their biggest election defeats ever. 
The heirs to the communists who built the Berlin Wall also gained, and could enter the city state government for the first time since unification. 
The debate about security and military strikes overshadowed local issues in a campaign which pitted three very different candidates for mayor against each other, including Germany's best-known homosexual and its most prominent ex-communist. 
Berliners are hoping for a new start after their city almost went bankrupt in a financial scandal at city-state owned Bankgesellschaft Berlin that brought down the previous, conservative-led government in June and left the city struggling under huge debts of 80 billion marks ($37 billion). 
Klaus Wowereit, the SPD politician who took over as acting mayor after the government collapsed in June and who outed himself as gay at the start of the campaign, is certain to be confirmed in office. 
The big quandary for Wowereit, and for his patron Schroeder, is who to form a coalition with. 
An alliance with the ex-communist Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS) would probably create a more stable city government than the alternative, a three-way coalition with the Greens and liberal Free Democrats. 
Gregor Gysi, the PDS candidate for mayor, said "All signs indicate there will be a coalition of SPD and PDS." 
But that would be deeply unpopular across west Germany, where misgivings persist about the PDS history as successor to the party that ruled East Germany and build the Wall. 
In addition, a so-called "Red-Red" coalition in Berlin would embarrass Schroeder, whose unqualified support of U.S. military strikes clashes with equally clear opposition from the PDS. 
"I'm keeping all options open," said a beaming Wowereit, who will start talks over forming a government in coming days. 
The PDS gained about five points to 22.7 percent as the party caught votes from Germany's sizeable peace lobby. 
But its near 50 percent support in east Berlin contrasted with just six percent in the west, and shows how psychologically divided the city remains even though remaining stretches of the Wall are so scarce that tourists have trouble finding them. 
The CDU's debacle was caused in part by sleaze charges that tainted their party more than the SPD, which had ruled with them in a grand coalition in Berlin for more than a decade. 
But some of the blame will also be laid at the door of Merkel.
"It is of course a black mark for the whole CDU," said Peter Loesche, a political scientist from Goettingen University. 
Loeche said Merkel would be blamed for letting the Berlin CDU field a weak candidate for mayor, Frank Steffel, a local politician who made a series of gaffes including calling Munich Germany's "secret capital." 
The Greens lost only slightly, to 9.2 from 9.9 percent, while the Free Democrats jumped to 9.6 percent from 2.2 percent, in a comeback that will enable the party to enter the city parliament and might make it an attractive partner for Schroeder at elections next year.
(Additional reporting by Emma Thomasson)
U.S. bombs pounded Afghanistan for a 12th day on Thursday in fierce strikes that the Pentagon said were apparently driving some of Osama bin Laden's al Qaeda guerrillas from cover and into American bombsights. 
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said "snippets of intelligence" suggested recent intense strikes by 100 warplanes were making the Saudi-born fugitive's network vulnerable and causing military defections from Afghanistan's ruling Taliban. 
At the same time, U.S. sources told Reuters privately that members of al Qaeda were killed in the U.S. military operations, but there was no evidence that bin Laden or his top lieutenants were among them. 
"We are seeing some people ... starting to decide that they would prefer not to be part of Taliban.
And we have seen some movement of what we believe to be the al Qaeda forces -- and they have been specifically targeted while they were moving," Rumsfeld told a Pentagon news conference. 
He added later there was evidence that Taliban and al Qaeda fighters were hiding in mosques and using populated civilian areas for command and control headquarters, and gathering sites. 
"They know that we are a country that tries to avoid high collateral damage targets," Rumsfeld said.
"So they do take advantage of that.
In fact, we see snippets of information where they are saying that." 
Rumsfeld spoke as U.S. warplanes continued hammering military targets of the Taliban around the capital Kabul, the Taliban stronghold of Kandahar and guerrilla training bases. 
The Taliban have refused to surrender bin Laden, accused by Washington of masterminding Sept. 11 attacks on America. 
Asked about reports from London, Rumsfeld said it was possible a senior al Qaeda official was killed.
But he said he could not confirm it. 
An Islamic organization in London reported that the bombing had killed a veteran al Qaeda fighter and associate of bin Laden from Egypt.
If true, the death would be the first reported for an important member of the bin Laden network. 
But U.S. sources, who spoke on condition of anonymity, told Reuters there is no evidence that bin Laden or his top lieutenants, Ayman Zawahri, Muhammad Atif, and Abu Zubaydah, were dead. 
"There have been some al Qaeda members who have died," since the U.S. bombing campaign started on Oct. 7," one official said. 
Aside from members of al Qaeda, U.S. officials have said previously that two family members of Taliban leader Mullah Mohammad Omar were killed on the first night of raids. 
Rumsfeld and Air Force Gen. Richard Myers, chairman of the military Joint Chiefs of Staff, refused on Thursday to say when U.S. Special Operations ground troops might join the war. 
AID FOR TALIBAN OPPONENTS? 
Rumsfeld told reporters later with visiting Italian Defense Minister Antonio Martino that the United States would like to be helpful with food, ammunition, and supplies to Taliban opposition groups such as the Northern Alliance and to receive targeting information from them. 
He declined to say whether weapons were already being supplied to their forces, indicating that the issue was politically sensitive. 
Military officials told Reuters on Wednesday that elite special forces were poised on the aircraft carrier USS Kitty Hawk in the Indian Ocean for possible deployment into Afghanistan against a weakened Taliban and al Qaeda.
But they cautioned against speculation about any quick move. 
Myers said only that the Pentagon planned to use all available military assets in one of the most significant challenges for the U.S. military since World War Two. 
Myers confirmed that Air Force F-15E jets based in the region were used for the first time in the campaign on Wednesday, striking Taliban troops and armor protecting the key northern city of Mazar-i-Sharif.
Other defense officials said the jets were based in Kuwait.
Texas Instruments Inc.
TXN.N , the world's No. 1 maker of computer chips for mobile phones, on Wednesday posted a third-quarter loss as world demand remained weak for cell phones and other communications equipment powered by TI semiconductors. 
The Dallas-based manufacturer said it expected a deeper loss in the current quarter but that this year's slide in revenues should bottom out in the same period. 
Texas Instruments posted a pro forma loss of $57 million, or 3 cents a share, in the third quarter compared with a profit of $589 million, or 33 cents a share, in the year-earlier quarter. 
TI said it expected the pro forma loss per share in the fourth quarter to be "about 6 cents more" than in the third quarter. 
The consensus analyst profit forecast was a loss of 4 cents per share, with a range between a loss of 1 cent and a loss of 7 cents, according to Thomson Financial/First Call. 
Texas Instruments shares closed before the earnings news at $29.91, down $1.58, or 5 percent.
The shares have lost 36 percent of their value this year and underperformed the broad benchmark S&P 500 index by 22 percent. 
Under generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), TI posted a net loss of $117 million compared with net income of $676 million in the year-ago period, and a diluted loss per share of 7 cents compared with earnings per share of 38 cents a year ago. 
Revenues were $1.85 billion after $3.13 billion a year earlier. 
TI said it expected fourth-quarter revenues to decline about 10 percent sequentially, mostly due to normal seasonal declines in calculators as well as continued weakness in semiconductors. 
But the company said it was beginning to see an upturn in orders for its core semiconductor products after a sharp decline since the end of last year, when world demand for cell phones and other communications devices and infrastructure hit a wall. 
"As things stand now, it appears that the third quarter will mark the bottom for orders, and the floor for revenue should be set in the fourth quarter," Tom Engibous, chairman, president and CEO, said in a statement. 
TI said it was trimming research and development spending this year to $1.5 billion pro forma from a prior estimate of $1.6 billion and last year's $1.6 billion.
Capital expenditures will remain unchanged from previous estimates for 2001 at $1.8 billion, down about 35 percent from last year.
President Bush urged Congress on Tuesday to pass an aviation security bill as soon as possible, his spokesman said as legislation that passed the Senate nearly two weeks ago stayed grounded in the House of Representatives. 
The authors of the Senate version denounced the latest delays in the House, with some Democratic senators charging that top House Republicans were postponing a decision for political and ideological reasons. 
"This is the worst kind of hoax," Sen. John Rockefeller, Democrat of West Virginia, said of the delay in House action.
"To have a few people holding this up in the House because they know they can't win if it comes to a vote, disgusts me." 
The House Republican leadership replied that their version of an aviation security bill would come to the floor later this week or next. 
Legislation to make airports and airplanes safer has been considered a top priority by many members of Congress since the attacks on Washington and New York on Sept 11. 
But an argument over whether to make baggage screeners government workers has slowed progress in both chambers. 
At the White House, Bush told congressional leaders in a morning meeting that he wanted Congress to produce a bill he can sign "as quickly as possible" and said he was willing to work with them on it, spokesman Ari Fleischer said. 
"The president made very clear in the meeting this morning that he hopes that the House will be able to take up legislation on aviation security.
The Senate has done it; he hopes the House will be able to do it as well," Fleischer said. 
He said Bush had invited members of the House to meet him to resolve the baggage screeners issue "and that way legislation can be sent to the president that he can sign." 
Bush has "a lot of concerns" about whether making all the screeners government employees is the most effective way to proceed, Fleischer said, but added that the president still considered this "an open issue." 
"The president is going to work hard with Congress on that," Fleischer said. 
The latest difficulty in the House, Republican leader Richard Armey said, was to find space for the Transportation Committee to meet and produce the House Republican version of the bill's final language -- a process known as "markup." 
The House and Senate have been shut out of their office buildings for six days while an environmental sweep goes on, checking for possible anthrax contamination. 
"Our most immediate problem now is finding a quick opportunity for the chairman to find a space and pull his committee together to complete that markup," Armey said. 
He said Alaska Republican Rep. Don Young, the chairman of the committee, would produce a bill "that basically covers all the ground that is desired by both Republicans and Democrats." 
But while the Senate version requires airport screeners to be government employees, the House version would leave this up to the president, Armey said.
"That should be an acceptable option for anyone," he declared. 
HALF A HAIRCUT? 
But Sen. Ernest Hollings, the South Carolina Democrat who co-authored the Senate version of the airport security legislation, scoffed at the idea of compromise on the question of making baggage screeners government employees. 
"You can't give us half a haircut here," Hollings said. 
Armey asserted that it was Democratic insistence on making the baggage screeners government workers -- and thus union employees -- that had been the real holdup.
The House Republicans, he said, were worried that this would make it much more difficult to fire employees for malfeasance. 
But leading Republicans have admitted that they may not have the votes in the House for their version.
Armey said that when the bill did come to the House floor, the Democrats would have a chance to make an amendment substituting their version.
Some U.S. postal workers have started to take an antibiotic called doxycycline, a less expensive alternative to the anthrax medicine Cipro, after getting the green light over the weekend from federal health officials, the U.S. Postal Service said. 
The postal service took action after getting an advisory on Saturday from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Washington, D.C., Department of Health, a USPS spokesman said on Sunday. 
Studies "support the use of doxycycline as the drug of choice ... both for newly identified individuals and for completion of the course in those previously started on (Cipro)," the CDC said in an advisory issued late on Saturday to area postal workers on its Washington Web site. 
"They (federal health officials) made an announcement that that's what they're providing for postal service employees," a USPS spokesman said. 
Only "a small fraction" of the estimated 6,000 Capitol-area workers on medication after possible exposure to anthrax had begun taking the new drug, the spokesman said.
"It's just a matter of what they provide." 
"Doxycycline has less side effects and is more readily available ...
so they made the switch to doxycycline," the USPS spokesman said. 
Two postal workers at the Brentwood facility in Washington, which processes mail for the U.S. Capitol, contracted inhalation anthrax and died, apparently after handling or being near a tainted letter sent to Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle. 
Anthrax tests are nearly ubiquitous at federal government sites after traces of the potentially fatal bacteria turned up in remote mail facilities that serve the White House, State Department, Supreme Court and CIA. 
Anthrax has killed three people and infected at least 11 others in the United States.
Thousands of people have been tested or treated for the rare disease since the Sept. 11 air attacks on the United States. 
Miami-based Ivax Corp. said on Friday it would supply the U.S. government with more than 1.2 billion doxycycline tablets as federal health officials build a national stockpile of drugs to treat anthrax. 
That announcement came after the government signed a deal with Bayer last Wednesday to supply 100 million tablets of Cipro. 
Scientists have praised doxycycline as a cheaper drug with fewer possible side effects than Cipro, the brand-name drug made by German firm Bayer AG . 
Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said doxycycline was being recommended now because it had fewer side effects than Cipro, the antibiotic first prescribed to those affected. 
"It's more available.
It's potentially less toxic ... and it's much more inexpensive, Fauci told CNN's "Late Edition." 
Fauci echoed comments by CDC Director Jeffrey Koplan on Friday.
Although Cipro has become a "panacea" for curing anthrax, the CDC would "recommend it in the same breath as doxycycline, which would be just as good," Koplan said on a phone conference with reporters. 
Bayer last week agreed to sell Cipro to the government at a steep discount of 95 cents per tablet for its branded product.
That figure is still double the over-the-counter price of doxycycline, which normally sells for between 45 cents and 50 cents each in drugstores. 
U.S. Health and Human Services
Secretary Tommy Thompson has said the government aims to compile enough anthrax treatments to treat 12 million people over a 60-day period. 
Many antibiotics are taken twice a day, meaning at least 1.44 billion pills would be needed for the stockpile.
WASHINGTON/ISLAMABAD (Reuters) -
The United States sought to build confidence in its drive against global terrorism on Wednesday, lining up international diplomatic support while preparing new safety measures to coax nervous Americans back onto airplanes. 
In New York, as hopes dimmed that any of the 6,347 people listed as missing after the Sept. 11 attack on the World Trade Center could still be found alive, families began registering for death certificates in grim acknowledgment that their loved ones probably perished in the collapse of the city's tallest buildings. 
As U.S. forces massed for possible strikes against Afghanistan, protesters set fire to the abandoned U.S. Embassy in Kabul and the leader of the hard-line Taliban pledged continued defiance of U.S. demands to hand over fugitive Saudi-born militant Osama bin Laden -- the man Washington says was behind the devastating attacks. 
"Even if it (the United States) were twice as strong, or twice that, it would not be strong enough to defeat us.
We are confident that no one can harm us if God is with us," Mullah Mohammad Omar said in an interview broadcast on Wednesday. 
Economic fears continued to reverberate around the world as policy makers from leading industrial nations fought to battle growing pessimism on the prospects for growth. 
The U.S. stock market, which rebounded earlier this week after posting its worst one-week drop since the Great Depression of the 1930s, resumed its downward slide as more airline layoffs and corporate earnings warnings sent skittish investors running for cover. 
Those fears have been greatest in the aviation industry, which has been forced into financial crisis following attacks that saw four hijacked commercial passenger planes turned into deadly missiles. 
Delta Air Lines Inc., the nation's No. 3 carrier, became the latest airline to announce major job cuts on Wednesday, saying it would lay off 13,000 people, or 16 percent of its workforce.
The Delta cuts pushed the total number of airline layoffs to well over 100,000 as the industry struggles with plunging travel demand in the wake of the attacks. 
In response, President Bush said he would unveil a package on Thursday aimed at getting wary travelers back in the skies -- slating such security improvements as stronger cockpit doors and more armed "sky marshals.
" 
"One of my concerns is that this terrible incident has convinced many Americans to stay at home.
One of the keys to economic recovery is going to be the vitality of the airline industry," Bush said. 
In Washington and in Europe, U.S. officials sought to give greater shape to the coalition against terror while keeping a tight lid on what military options the United States was considering as it masses warplanes, ships and troops within striking distance of Afghanistan. 
U.S. Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz met with NATO defense ministers in Brussels, and then told reporters it was unlikely the United States would request full NATO action in the coming conflict. 
"If we need collective action, we'll ask for it.
We don't anticipate that at the moment," he said, playing down expectations of imminent or spectacular U.S. military action. 
Secretary of State Colin Powell said on Wednesday that Bush would also consider seeking additional U.N. support for military strikes -- although he stressed that Washington believed it had the right to defend itself. 
But while the United States has successfully isolated Afghanistan's Taliban, there were already signs of trouble in its drive to put together solid international backing for military action against bin Laden and his al Qaeda network of Islamic militants. 
Western hopes that Iran might join the coalition against bin Laden and his Taliban hosts were dashed on Wednesday when Iranian Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei angrily vowed that his country could take no part "in an attack on suffering, neighboring Muslim Afghanistan." 
"We do not believe America is sincere enough to lead an international move against terrorism.
America has its hands deep in blood for all the crimes committed by the Zionist regime," he said, referring to Israel. 
Egypt, one of Washington's closest Arab allies, also voiced doubts as Egyptian Foreign Minister Ahmed Maher said that Washington should make its case to the international community before embarking on military action. 
"We believe that the United States, as the government of a country that believes in law and justice, will act on the basis of a case, a good case -- because I am sure they have a good case," Maher told reporters after meeting Powell on Wednesday. 
Across the United States, people continued to grieve for the nearly 7,000 people feared killed when hijacked airliners slammed into New York's World Trade Center and the Pentagon near Washington in choreographed attacks.
Another hijacked jet crashed in Pennsylvania, killing all on board. 
In Boston, more than 20,000 people crowded City Hall Plaza for a memorial service for the crews aboard American Airlines Flight 11 and United Airlines Flight 175, both of which were hijacked from Boston's Logan Airport. 
While rescue workers picked through the ruins of the World Trade Center's 110-story towers, hundreds of people went to a New York assistance center to apply for death certificates necessary to claim life insurance and other death benefits for the missing. 
"Now we'll have a memorial service to say goodbye," Alfredo Bordenabe said after applying for a death certificate for his wife, Crystine, who was eight months pregnant and worked at an investment bank in World Trade Center. 
"You can't hold out hope when they say there are probably no survivors.
My heart doesn't skip a beat anymore when the phone or the doorbell rings.
And this is the main way to get closure," he added. 
Hopes for a quick recovery seemed to recede as ratings agency Standard & Poor's said the attack would push the United States into recession and halt global economic growth in the coming quarters. 
The International Monetary Fund, for its part, issued a report saying the attacks added "further increased downside risk" to an already slow U.S. economy. 
Policy makers from leading industrial nations including Italy and Germany have voiced confidence that growth can continue despite war fears and plunging consumer confidence. 
But U.S. consumer sentiment -- the engine behind the world's largest economy -- looked shaky at best, with several studies showing it at or near recessionary levels. 
The situation in Afghanistan was far worse.
Already one of the poorest countries in the world, Afghanistan faces a "stunning" humanitarian crisis as the threat of U.S. military strikes exacerbates already tenuous conditions, six U.N. agencies said in a joint statement. 
They said war fears could drive another 1.5 million Afghans to flee the country, joining 3.5 million who have already sought refuge in Iran and Pakistan in recent years. 
In Kabul, angry Taliban supporters torched the U.S. Embassy building abandoned since 1989 -- axing down doors and starting fires while declaring support for Islam and bin Laden, who has lived in Afghanistan as a "guest" for some five years. 
The Taliban's leader, Mullah Mohammad Omar, told his people they should not join the exodus of refugees, saying America "has no reason, justification or evidence" for attacking Afghanistan. 
The Taliban has recommended bin Laden leave the country, but has said it cannot find him to deliver the news. 
In an ironic twist, Omar was given air time by Voice of America (VOA) radio on Wednesday as it broadcast a rare interview with the reclusive leader despite State Department objections that the taxpayer-funded broadcaster should not be used to propagate his views. 
"This is not just an issue of Osama bin Laden.
This is an issue of Islam, Islam throughout the world.
Islam's prestige is at stake," Omar said on VOA. 
WASHINGTON/ISLAMABAD (Reuters) -
Taliban gunners fired fierce volleys at two aircraft flying high over Kabul on Saturday in what appeared to be a spy mission before an expected U.S.-led war on the Osama bin Laden network and its Afghan protectors. 
President Bush warned Afghanistan's hard-line Islamic rulers that time was running out for them to surrender bin Laden, but Taliban leader Mullah Mohammad Omar said there was no case against the Saudi exile. 
The Taliban sought to use eight detained Western aid workers as bargaining chips to avert a U.S. offensive, but Washington immediately rejected any deal. 
Pakistan said it had no plans to intercede further to try to avert the conflict, set in motion when hijackers flew three aircraft into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on Sept. 11.
About 5,600 people were killed in those attacks and the crash of a fourth hijacked jetliner in Pennsylvania. 
Bush, in his weekly radio address, said the Taliban had had the opportunity to shut down bin Laden's al Qaeda network -- which the United States accuses of being behind the attacks -- but had not taken it. 
An explosion rocked the Saudi city of al-Khobar, killing two foreigners and wounding four, but Bush administration officials said they saw no immediate connection between the blast and the U.S. efforts to build a coalition to take on the Taliban and al Qaeda. 
The official Saudi Press Agency said details of the blast at an electronics shop were still sketchy.
Khobar was the scene of a truck bomb that killed 19 U.S. soldiers in 1996. 
In his radio address, Bush warned: "Full warning has been given, and time is running out. ...
For those nations that stand with the terrorists, there will be a heavy price.
" 
"In the struggle ahead, we will act in accordance with American ideals," he said.
"We're offering help and friendship to the Afghan people.
It is their Taliban rulers and the terrorists they harbor who have much to fear." 
Bush said the Taliban had turned Afghanistan "into a sanctuary and training ground for international terrorists -- terrorists who have killed innocent citizens of many nations." 
Pakistan, the only nation to maintain diplomatic ties with the rulers of neighboring Afghanistan, echoed the U.S. warning about bin Laden. 
"The Taliban know what the international community expects of them," said Pakistani Foreign Ministry spokesman Riaz Mohammad Khan.
"If they decide to respond to what the international community wants ... it is to their advantage to do so." 
The spokesman said Pakistan had no plans to make new diplomatic overtures to the Taliban, who are seeking to portray the U.S.-led campaign against them as an assault on Islam. 
Omar, the spiritual leader of the Taliban, took a defiant line in a statement faxed to reporters in Kabul. 
"Those who have perpetrated the attacks in the United States have left no traces behind them.
If the United States thinks that the hijackers were the real culprits, then they have been killed," he said. 
"No one will commit suicide on the orders of another or for the aims and interests of others," Omar said, adding that the United States should examine its own record in trying to find the "remedy" for the attacks last month. 
U.S. support for Israel and the presence of U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia have been cited as factors fueling Islamic hostility toward America. 
After nearly four weeks of mounting tension in Central Asia, intense anti-aircraft fire erupted over Kabul on Saturday for about 15 minutes as gunners tried to bring down two aircraft.
One official said at least one of the planes was an unmanned surveillance drone. 
Witnesses said a surface-to-air missile was also fired at the intruders.
It was the first time anti-aircraft batteries had opened fire in the Afghan capital since test-firing several days ago sent residents scurrying for cover. 
There was no immediate comment on the flights from the Pentagon, which has begun a major military buildup in the region as it prepares to retaliate for the attacks last month. 
The Taliban linked the fate of eight detained Western aid workers to the U.S. military preparations. 
"If the United States mitigates the sufferings of the common people of Afghanistan and gives up its dire threats, then the Afghan government will also take steps to release the eight detained foreigners," a Foreign Ministry statement said. 
Washington quickly rejected the offer.
"These demands (to hand over bin Laden and his network) aren't subject to negotiations," a White House official said.
"It is time for actions, not words." 
Omar has ordered the release of British journalist Yvonne Ridley, who was arrested a week ago for entering Afghanistan illegally, the Afghan Islamic Press reported.
She was expected to be released by Sunday. 
British Prime Minister Tony Blair, back in Britain after visiting Pakistan and India on a tour aimed at bolstering support for the U.S.-led coalition, said coalition members had the will and the capacity to act. 
"The trap is being set around the Taliban regime in the sense that we are cutting off their sources of financing and supply and we have built a very strong diplomatic and political coalition in the area," Blair said. 
PROTESTS TARGET BRITAIN, U.S. Up to 4,000 people staged protests against Blair and the United States in the Pakistani city of Peshawar on Saturday. 
"We declare war on America and Britain," said one speaker from the Jamiat-e-Ulema Islam, which has said it has started recruiting fighters to go to Afghanistan if the United States attacks. 
In Washington, G7 finance ministers from leading industrial nations gathered to discuss ways of financially starving groups responsible for terrorism and of limiting damage to their economies from the Sept. 11 attacks. 
In Geneva, donor countries pledged sufficient funds for a $584 million U.N. emergency appeal for Afghanistan. 
U.N. emergency relief coordinator Kenzo
Oshima said countries promised $608 million during a two-day meeting of the U.N.-sponsored Afghan Forum but some of the funds would be paid to non-U.N. relief groups. 
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld returned from a trip to the Middle East and Central Asia, and White House officials said Bush was satisfied with the cooperation being given by a number of countries there, including Pakistan, Uzbekistan, Oman, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia. 
America has launched the biggest U.S. military buildup since the 1991 Gulf War.
U.S. and British aircraft carriers, more than 300 warplanes, ships armed with cruise missiles and special forces troops have gathered within striking range.
About 30,000 troops have been deployed. 
Taliban officials threatened on Saturday to attack neighboring Uzbekistan if it aided the United States in pursuing bin Laden. 
"We will attack Uzbekistan if any attack is launched from its borders," Radio Voice of Shariat quoted officials as telling a rally in Hairaton, near the Uzbek border. 
Uzbekistan's president, Islam Karimov, said on Friday that he would make an air base available for use by U.S. cargo planes, helicopters and troops, but only for humanitarian and rescue operations.
Advanced Micro Devices Inc. on Wednesday posted its first loss in at least five quarters as the chipmaker suffered from a slowing economy, grim PC sales and a bitter price war with rival Intel Corp., prompting it to warn of an operating loss in the fourth quarter. 
Advanced Micro Devices (AMD)
AMD.N said it recorded a loss of $186.9 million, or 54 cents a share, compared with net income of $408.6 million, or $1.18 a share last year.
Sales fell 37 percent to $765.9 million from $1.21 billion. 
Excluding charges related to job cuts and closing two plants, Sunnyvale, California-based AMD had a loss of $97.4 million, or 28 cents a share, in line with a warning issued on Oct. 5.
Analysts were expecting, after the Oct. 5 warning, a loss of 28 cents, with a forecast loss range of 18 cents to 30 cents, according to market data research firm Thomson Financial/First Call. 
In the year-ago period, excluding a gain of $336.9 million from the sale of its voice communications unit Legerity and a charge of $22.9 million for retiring debt, AMD had a profit of $219.3 million, or 64 cents. 
Shares of AMD fell 95 cents to $9.66 ahead of the report, which came after markets closed.
AMD shares have fallen 30 percent this year, compared with a 21 percent decline in larger rival Intel's stock price. 
AMD said it had market share in the 22 percent range in the market for microprocessors, although Intel said on Tuesday when it reported quarterly results that it gained two to three points of market share, largely at the expense of AMD. 
AMD said it had record sales of the Athlon and Duron processors, coming in at more than 7.7 million, which was consistent with the record level of the second quarter. 
Sales of chips in its memory group, mostly flash chip sales, declined 34 percent to $210 million from the second quarter, and reflected continuing weakness in the communications sector and bloated inventories at major customers, AMD said in a statement. 
The company said that sales of flash chips in the fourth quarter will range from unchanged to growth of 10 percent over the third quarter.
It also said it expects again to sell a record number of Athlon and Duron chips in the fourth quarter. 
Overall, AMD said it expects total company sales to be flat to "high single-digit percentage growth" in the fourth quarter. 
"Revenues in this range would be insufficient to offset the current level of expenses, and therefore the company currently expects to report an operating loss in the fourth quarter," the company said in a statement. 
A survey of analysts by First Call expect the company to post a loss of 21 cents a share for the fourth quarter.
Networking equipment maker Juniper Networks Inc. JNPR.O on Thursday reported third-quarter results that beat Wall Street expectations and said it had focused on finances in a tough environment. 
Excluding one-time charges, Juniper posted a profit of $32.5 million, or 10 cents per share.
In the year-earlier quarter the Sunnyvale, California-based company had earnings of $60.3 million, or 17 cents per share. 
Revenues for the quarter were $201.7 million compared with $201.2 million a year ago. 
Shares jumped in after hours trade to $20.35 on Instinet from a close of $16.64 on the Nasdaq, where the stock had already gained 11 percent for the day. 
"It seems like a very solid quarter in an environment where a month ago everybody thought these guys were falling off a cliff," said SoundView Technology analyst Ilya Grozovsky. 
"They (results) are in line with the company's guidance, and that is obviously much better than the Street expected." 
Most analysts polled by research firm Thomson Financial/First Call predicted the company would post third-quarter earnings in a range of 5 cents to 9 cents per share.
The consensus view was for earnings of 7 cents per share on revenue of $187.92 million. 
Juniper reported a slew of extraordinary charges, including a charge to contract manufacturers of $39.9 million, resulting in an overall net loss of $29.7 million or 9 cents per share for the quarter, compared with net income of $58.1 million or 17 cents per share in the third quarter of 2000. 
The company also announced a two-year stock buyback program worth up to $200 million. 
"The ability to deliver a strong bottom line in difficult times is strategic," said Chairman and Chief Executive Scott Kriens in a statement, adding that the company focused on financial fundamentals. 
Juniper stock has underperformed bigger rival Cisco Systems Inc.
CSCO.O by about 70 percent this year, although both are down by more than half. 
Both also have perked up since Oct. 4, when Cisco reaffirmed the company's outlook for the fiscal quarter ending Oct. 31, although Mountain View, California-based Juniper declined to comment at the time. 
Networking companies were hard hit after major customers such as telecommunications firms found themselves with more capacity than needed, helping to propel the economy into the current slowdown.
The U.S. government posted a surplus of $127.17 billion in the 2001 budget year, a fall from the record surplus seen in the prior year and the first time since 1992 the annual federal budget picture has deteriorated. 
The Treasury Department and the Office of Management and Budget said on Monday the dwindling surplus reflected in part lower revenues due to a faltering U.S. economy. 
"The (revenue) shortfall was largely related to lower-than-expected collections of individual income taxes and corporation income due to the slowing economy," the agencies said in a joint press release. 
The decrease in the surplus from the record $236.92 billion in fiscal 2001 marked the first time since 1992 there has not been either a smaller deficit or a larger surplus in the government's accounts on an annual basis. 
The 2001 fiscal picture was boosted by Social Security receipts.
Excluding Social Security and Postal Service receipts, the government posted a budget shortfall of about $33.52 billion, down sharply from the $87.10 billion surplus seen on the same basis last year. 
The surplus for September, the final month in the fiscal year, was $35.39 billion, down from $65.75 billion in September 2000, reflecting a variety of factors.
The United States will soon put more elite troops on the ground in Afghanistan, sharply increasing bomb targeting and other support for anti-Taliban forces, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said on Thursday. 
But bad weather and Taliban ground fire had beaten back recent attempts to insert more forces, said Rumsfeld, adding the military would press ahead with the plan. 
"We have a number of teams cocked and ready to go," he said.
They would join fewer than 100 U.S. special forces in northern Afghanistan. 
"We are going to be adding people to have a reasonable cluster of American special forces who are able to be in there, serve as liaison, assist with the communication, assist with the targeting," Rumsfeld told a Pentagon news briefing. 
"I would like to see, as soon as humanly possible, the numbers of teams go up by three or four times." 
Rumsfeld told reporters there had been no U.S. casualties from ground fire against what other U.S. officials told Reuters were attempts to insert troops using helicopters. 
"Ground fire was simply too heavy to unload the folks and so they went back and they'll try it again in a different landing area," the secretary said.
Weather was also a problem. 
Rumsfeld and Air Force Gen. Richard Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, denied press reports that Washington had shifted its strategy of waiting for closer cooperation among anti-Taliban factions and was now openly and strongly supporting the Northern Alliance. 
The heavy bombing strikes in support of alliance troops trying to capture the capital of Kabul and northern crossroads city of Mazar-i-Sharif were simply part of a progressive campaign planned all along, they said. 
"We have made measurable progress," said Rumsfeld, noting the U.S.-British air campaign against the Taliban and al Qaeda guerrillas, in response to the devastating Sept. 11 attacks on America, had only been going on for less than a month. 
The United States and Britain began an air campaign on Oct. 7 aimed at the al Qaeda network led by Osama bin Laden and the Taliban forces which rule most of Afghanistan and have been sheltering bin Laden. 
"There is no doubt in my mind but that the American people know that it's going to take more than 24 days to deal with this very difficult problem," he said of a war on terrorism sparked by attacks using hijacked airliners to smash into the Pentagon and New York City's World Trade Center, killing more than 4,800 people. 
"Today is November 1, and smoke at this very moment is still rising from the ruins of the World Trade Center," he said. 
Washington conceded for the first time on Tuesday it had dozens of troops in northern Afghanistan helping provide food and ammunition to Northern Alliance forces and pinpointing targets for U.S. warplanes bombing Taliban troops defending Kabul and Mazar-i-Sharif. 
In addition to bringing more troops, Rumsfeld said food and ammunition were being sent to anti-Taliban forces. 
"We're not only trying to increase the numbers that are doing that (opposing the ruling Taliban), we're trying to improve their success, and to the extent we can provide, get people in with them and provide the targeting to help us," he said. 
The United States has faced strong criticism from the Muslim world for the increasingly heavy bombing and for civilian deaths caused by bombs gone awry. 
Human rights groups have also attacked the U.S. use of cluster bombs, which can rain up to 200 explosive bomblets on a target. 
"They are being used on front-line al Qaeda and Taliban troops to try to kill them ... to be perfectly blunt," Rumsfeld said. 
Myers added that the bombs were being dropped after careful study to make sure that attacks were within the international laws of armed conflict. 
The general also told reporters the military was considering the addition of two new spy planes, including the Pentagon's experimental unmanned "Global Hawk" aircraft, to weaponry in the skies over Afghanistan. 
The Global Hawk, with a wingspan of 116 feet, can remain airborne for 24 hours at altitudes of 60,000 feet while providing real-time video pictures of movements on the ground. 
The Air Force, Myers added, might also deploy its four-engine "JSTARS" surveillance and attack targeting aircraft to the region.
The crew aboard the military version of a Boeing 707 aircraft can watch over the ground from long range and provide information on enemy movements for both air and ground strikes.
The White House Tuesday strongly defended President Bush's decision to restrict most members of Congress from access to sensitive information about U.S. military strikes abroad or threats to Americans at home after the Sept. 11 attacks. 
Working to bolster the government bureaucracy in his war on terrorism, Bush chose retired Army Gen. Wayne Downing to be deputy national security adviser for combating terrorism, and Richard Clarke, who was already working on anti-terrorism at the White House, as special adviser for cyberspace security. 
"Let's not make any bones about it," said Clarke at his announcement ceremony.
"This is going to be an extremely difficult job.
It's a tough foe, it's a determined foe, and as events have shown us, it is a very, very smart foe and a crafty foe." 
Bush, trying to keep an international coalition together, was due to meet German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder Tuesday in a visit aides said was arranged over the weekend as the United States launched air strikes against Afghanistan.
Bush spoke by telephone with Senegalese President Abdoulaye Wade. 
The German newspaper Bild, in a report to appear on Wednesday, said Schroeder would offer German surveillance planes and transport aircraft that could help deliver humanitarian aid to Afghanistan. 
Seeking to cork leaks from Capitol Hill, Bush told key members of his Cabinet in an Oct. 5 memo that "until you receive further notice from me" only eight key members of Congress could be briefed on the U.S. response to the attacks, instead of the larger group that would expect to be told. 
Aides said Bush was angered by leaks from a closed briefing by CIA officials to the Senate Intelligence Committee last week.
The Washington Post reported the committee was told of a "100 percent threat risk" of more attacks on U.S. soil that could encompass assaults against exposed infrastructure like natural gas pipelines and nuclear power plants. 
The decision, disclosed Monday, has led to grumbling among members of Congress that Bush was abusing their traditional oversight role.
White House spokesman Ari Fleischer's daily briefing was dominated by questions about the new policy, which is aimed at stopping news leaks from Capitol Hill on both the military operation and the law enforcement effort in response to the Sept. 11 attacks. 
"It's a reflection of the fact that our nation is now at war, and the rules have changed," said White House spokesman Ari Fleischer. 
Separately, Bush notified leaders of Congress in a letter that the U.S. military operation was likely to be long. 
"It is not possible to know at this time either the duration of the combat operations or the scope and duration of the deployment of U.S. armed forces necessary to counter the terrorist threat to the United States," he wrote. 
Two cases in Florida of anthrax, a rare, often fatal infection that sparked fears of biological terrorism, has prompted the federal government to investigate whether it was related to Sept. 11. 
Fleischer said "it remains a situation of concern" but cautioned against jumping to conclusions. 
"The federal government will continue to vigorously pursue any possible leads to make certain that all health considerations are fully addressed to the satisfaction of anybody who has concerns," Fleischer said. 
Afghanistan's Taliban rulers shelter Saudi-born dissident Osama bin Laden, whom the United States blames for the Sept. 11 attacks that killed more than 5,500 people. 
The military strikes against Afghanistan are prompting some violent protests in the Arab world.
Pakistan's largest Islamic party Tuesday threatened to put millions of protesters on the streets if the strikes were not stopped. 
Fleischer cited supportive comments from Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, Saudi Foreign Minister Saud al-Faisal and the governments of Jordan and Bahrain. 
He said he was aware of press accounts saying Bush had been asked for an interview by al-Jazeera -- an Arabic television station in Qatar that broadcast bin Laden's denunciation of the West after the air strikes began -- and that if it was indeed true the White House would consider it.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair used an interview with the station Monday to counter bin Laden's efforts to rally Arab opinion around him. 
A CBS News poll released Tuesday said Americans overwhelmingly supported the strikes on Afghanistan and Bush's overall response to last month's attacks on the United States. 
Eighty-seven percent of those surveyed approved of the strikes launched, while 6 percent disapproved.
Ninety percent approved of Bush's overall performance, up from 89 percent last month.
Transportation Secretary Norman Mineta said on Tuesday he hoped to have an airline bailout plan ready by early next week and signaled that carriers could be reimbursed for losses related to the closure of U.S. air space after last week's disastrous hijackings. 
But the White House and Congress, which would have to approve any bailout, do not favor granting $7.8 billion in tax relief that major carriers have requested as part of a $24 billion plan. 
Speaking after a meeting at the White House with Bush economic and budget advisers and airline executives, Mineta said the administration had received the "essential" financial and other information from the industry to proceed with a bailout proposal. 
"President (George W.)
Bush and his administration are committed to working closely with all industry members and with the Congress to help maintain the strength of our nation's aviation industry," Mineta said earlier in the day before another meeting with airline executives at his office. 
Last Tuesday's attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon grounded U.S. commercial aviation for two days, prompted costly new security steps, further drove down revenues and left many people afraid to fly. 
"The industry had been having financial difficulties even before this heinous terrorist event," Mineta said.
"Those events have made the problem more acute." 
Delta Air Lines DAL.N chairman and chief executive
Leo Mullin said the industry had almost no revenue in the last three or four days of last week and would probably take in no more than 40 percent to 50 percent of normal revenues in the next few days. 
An industry "white paper" being circulated on Capitol Hill said U.S. commercial airlines were expected to start filing for bankruptcy protection within days unless a bailout was imminent.
The paper said many carriers would face the same plight within 90 days unless there was federal relief. 
U.S. carriers already have taken austerity measures and are expected to eliminate more than 100,000 jobs as a result of reduced demand, the industry has said. 
The position paper said that on Aug. 31, the aggregate industry cash balance was $9 billion.
Airlines would have eaten through their cash reserves and would need to find $1.1 billion by November and $15 billion by the end of June 2002, the white paper showed. 
Mineta said final details of the bailout would have to be worked out with both houses of Congress and he hoped lawmakers would act quickly. 
While congressional leaders acknowledged the aviation industry was a cornerstone of U.S. economic viability, Senate Majority leader Tom Daschle told reporters lawmakers were prepared to act swiftly but would not rush. 
The South Dakota Democrat said they were not yet ready to settle on a figure for a final bailout. 
House Democratic leader Richard Gephardt of Missouri said the most important thing "for all of us" was to "get back on airplanes and show our confidence in the safety of this system." 
While details of the rescue plan had to be hammered out, Mineta said there was "some recognition" airlines should be "made whole" for losses directly related to the attacks. 
The industry wants $5 billion in direct compensation for those losses. 
"What we do on the balance of the project, or the package, that is something we're going to have to look at," Mineta said. 
But a key Senate Republican said congressional leaders and White House officials told the airlines their request for $7.8 billion in temporary tax relief would not be part of a larger aid package. 
The Republican leadership in the House of Representatives hopes to pass an airline bailout this week, congressional sources said. 
Rep. Roy Blunt, a Missouri Republican, said the airlines would need to "essentially open the books" to show net losses from last week's grounding. 
Blunt said it might be wiser to proceed with a short-term measure and then have the option of revisiting the matter to see if "that was enough." 
Commerce Secretary Donald Evans told Reuters Tuesday that direct aid through loans was a possibility. 
Ground controllers are more optimistic that the space shuttle Columbia's 11-day mission to the Hubble Space Telescope can be completed despite a problem with a critical cooling system, NASA told the seven astronauts aboard Columbia on Saturday.
Within minutes of liftoff on Friday, NASA discovered a low flow rate in a coolant loop that prevents heat from building up in the orbiter's electronics systems, especially when the shuttle re-enters the Earth's atmosphere and temperatures are at their peak.
The mission management team is to meet again on Saturday and may announce a final decision on whether Columbia stays or returns to Earth.
revealed on Saturday that the flow of Freon through the loop actually was below the safety margin prescribed by flight rules, but that mission managers think they can bypass the problem by turning off some heat-generating electronics aboard the shuttle during re-entry.
"The discussion is still ongoing, and as you know and would have expected, people are sharpening their pencils and taking a real close look at this," Mission Control told the astronauts.
"The analysis and discussion thus far are such that people are feeling more and more optimistic about the prospects of remaining on orbit and continuing the flight."
One thing bolstering the mission's prospects is that engineers do not believe there is a leak in the line.
Instead, the most likely culprit is debris that could be clogging a filter.
That debris may have been introduced during a 2.5 year, $164 million overhaul Columbia has undergone since it last flew in 1999.
would not speculate what the debris might actually be.
Astronaut Scott Altman, the mission commander, told reporters during a round of Earth-to-orbit interviews that the crew did not really understand the seriousness of the problem when it was first discovered.
"It got our attention at first, although I thought it might just be a minor problem.
It wasn't apparent right at first just what the impact would be," Altman said.
"We're just hopeful we can square everything away and perform what we came here to space to do."
Columbia is scheduled to rendezvous with the four-story Hubble telescope early on Sunday and astronaut Nancy Currie will use the shuttle's robotic arm to snatch the observatory from its own orbit and secure it to a platform in the shuttle's payload bay.
What follows is five very demanding, very long spacewalks on five consecutive days as two teams of astronauts will add new solar-power arrays, install a new phone-booth sized imaging camera, repair an existing camera and install a new power control unit with dozens of power couplings to feed all the satellite's systems.
That last task is the real nail-biter because it requires NASA to cut power to the satellite for the first time since it was launched in 1990, and the astronauts will have to remove an old power unit that was not designed to be worked on by astronauts.
If any part of that operation goes foul, there is a good chance the Hubble would have to be abandoned in space, only to eventually fall to Earth and burn in the atmosphere.
The Hubble Space Telescope showed signs of life on Wednesday after a pair of spacewalking astronauts finished a risky repair job that NASA compared to a heart transplant.
The operation to replace a faulty power control unit, which NASA managers had feared could turn the costly satellite into a piece of space junk, was quickly followed by a stream of data as ground controllers coaxed the patient back to life.
"Hubble has a heartbeat," said NASA spokesman Rob Navias.
The satellite still faced hours of testing as systems were brought back online one by one.
Astronauts John Grunsfeld and Rick Linnehan from the space shuttle Columbia had the difficult task of replacing the aging observatory's power control unit, a 160-pound box that distributes electricity to all the satellite's instruments and flight systems.
"Outstanding work getting all of that done," a relieved Mission Control radioed the astronauts, making the third of five spacewalks on this 11-day mission.
had to turn off Hubble's power for the first time since it sat at the Kennedy Space Center in 1990 awaiting liftoff.
Since satellites are rarely turned off after launch, and Hubble had never been turned off, NASA counted this mission among its most risky and challenging to date.
The old power unit was meant to be a permanent component, never to be handled 350 miles above Earth by men in bulky pressure suits, big white helmets and stiff, thick gloves.
Linnehan had to disconnect most of the three dozen power couplings that led to various Hubble systems, much of the time using a special tool designed just for this job, since his gloved hand could not reach some of the cables and couplings.
Grunsfeld had the job of installing the new system, which because of its size presented many of the same obstacles.
Once NASA cut the power to Hubble, ground controllers had about 10 hours to get it up and running again before the frigid cold of outer space damaged sensitive scientific instruments.
The old unit had never failed in orbit, but Hubble has done all of its great science work handicapped by a malfunction caused by a loose screw that made the power output somewhat unpredictable.
Without the new unit, Hubble did not have the power to use all the new instruments being added on this mission, including a new imaging camera, a new cooling system and the resuscitation of a long-dormant infra-red spectrometer.
But the job was almost stymied before it began.
About 25 minutes before Grunsfeld and Linnehan were first scheduled to depressurize their airlock, Grunsfeld's suit suddenly began leaking water from a cooling system.
"I'm monitoring John's suit and there's a large bit of water here near the battery," radioed astronaut Jim Newman, who was helping Grunsfeld prepare for the spacewalk.
It was not clear how much water leaked, or why, but the astronauts were clearly concerned, since free-floating fluids are very hard to clean up in the weightlessness of space.
"The back of the suit's pretty well saturated," said astronaut Nancy Currie.
Television pictures beamed down from Columbia showed several astronauts trying to capture the water with towels before it could escape the suit.
Grunsfeld was ordered into another suit and Linnehan stayed in the airlock throughout the two-hour delay.
Israel's security cabinet convened after the killing of a Jewish settler Thursday to weigh the fate of a cease-fire with the Palestinians that could be vital to U.S. efforts to forge a broad anti-terror coalition. 
"A retreat from the cease-fire is one of the options," Israeli Transport Minister Ephraim Sneh said before the late-night meeting. 
But Israeli commentators said it was unlikely Israeli leaders would risk angering Washington by scrapping the two-day-old truce. 
Palestinian President Yasser Arafat also met his own cabinet as the cease-fire, agreed under intense international pressure following last week's suicide-hijack attacks in New York and Washington, hung in the balance. 
The truce took a blow earlier in the day when Palestinians fired on a car carrying a settler family back to their home in the occupied West Bank after the Jewish New Year holiday of Rosh Hashanah. 
Sarit Amrani was killed and her husband wounded as they drove with their children near the settlement of Tekoa, close to Palestinian-ruled Bethlehem. 
A senior Palestinian official said Arafat telephoned Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres after the attack to say he was "very angry" about the killing and would investigate. 
Later in the Gaza Strip, Palestinians fired at an Israeli army post in the Jewish settlement of Kfar Darom, slightly wounding five soldiers, a military spokesman said. 
The troops returned fire, killing one of the attackers, the spokesman said. 
In a separate incident, Palestinian gunmen shot and wounded an Israeli security guard at the Karni commercial crossing between Israel and the Gaza Strip.
Israeli forces returned fire, damaging a Palestinian police post but causing no casualties. 
Israeli Army Radio said an Israeli tank fired three shells at Palestinian gunmen approaching the Israeli border near the West Bank city of Qalqilya.
Palestinian security officials, confirming the shell fire, said no one was hurt. 
"I am very sorry the Palestinian Authority did not stand by its commitments and we will decide today how to act," Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon told reporters as he announced the security cabinet meeting. 
"This cease-fire was respected for a few hours -- 20 hours -- and then there was an outbreak of acts of terror...
It began yesterday at seven in the evening and continued today with a great disaster," he added. 
The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades, a group linked to Arafat's Fatah faction, claimed responsibility for the West Bank killing. 
Palestinian officials regretted the incident but said they were making the "maximum" effort to ensure the cease-fire held. 
Political sources said the Israeli government would decide whether talks between Peres and Arafat could take place.
Israel wants 48 hours of total calm before it starts any talks with the Palestinians. 
One source said the meeting on arranging a lasting truce might still go ahead, but that a warning could be issued to Arafat that "if the attacks continue, Israel will resume initiated military operations" in Palestinian-ruled areas. 
An end to a year of Israeli-Palestinian violence could be crucial to Washington's efforts to enlist Arab and Muslim countries into a coalition it wants to form to battle terrorism. 
The level of violence in the West Bank and Gaza Strip has been much reduced, but Sharon was under pressure from settlers and right-wingers to act after the killing of the settler. 
The umbrella YESHA Council of Jewish settlements called on Sharon sarcastically to take advantage of the "resounding success" of the cease-fire and meet "the terrorist Arafat." 
Speaking to Israeli Army Radio, Palestinian cabinet minister Ziad Abu Zayyad said he was sorry to hear about the Israeli woman's death. 
"But I would expect that as the meeting between Arafat and Peres approaches there will be people interested in sabotaging such talks," he said. 
"I said that for us to enforce the cease-fire and make sure it is implemented fully we will need some time, some effort, as well as efforts on the Israeli side." 
Palestinian officials have demanded that Israel lift a crippling military blockade of the West Bank and Gaza Strip in connection with the cease-fire. 
The truce talks are intended to pave the way to a renewal of peace negotiations that stalled shortly before a Palestinian revolt against Israeli occupation began last September.
At least 584 Palestinians and 168 have been killed in the bloodshed. 
A leading U.S. abortion rights group said on Monday that 90 of its clinics and offices in at least 13 states had received envelopes containing threatening letters and an unidentified powdery substance. 
Planned Parenthood Federation of America said some of the letters included messages from a group called the Army of God, a militant anti-abortion group that has advocated violence against medical personnel who perform abortions. 
A spokesman for Planned Parenthood, who asked not to be quoted by name, said the letters were delivered to the organization's national offices and numerous local offices and medical facilities those offices operate.
Abortions are performed at many of those facilities, as well as various health services for women. 
The group said there have been no reported injuries and that law enforcement officials, including FBI investigators, were conducting tests on the powdery substance to determine whether it was anthrax bacterium spores. 
The news comes amid a nationwide scare involving the potentially deadly bacteria that could be used as a biological warfare agent. 
The spokesman for the group said initial field test on the substance in letters received at two locations had come back as negative for anthrax.
One of the letters had been sent to offices in Greensboro, North Carolina.
The spokesman said he did not know the location that received the second letter that tested negative. 
Planned Parenthood said the envelopes were mailed to Planned Parenthood offices bearing postmarks from four cities: Atlanta; Columbus, Ohio; and Chattanooga and Knoxville, Tennessee.
The spokesman said he believed all the letters were received on Monday.
The offices and clinics receiving the letters are located in the East Coast and Midwest, the group said. 
"All of them are in the hands of various authorities around the country.
As far as we can tell, they all came today in regular mail," the spokesman said. 
Planned Parenthood said the letters had pre-printed return addresses from the U.S. Marshall's Office and the Secret Service.
Some had a message stating, "Time Sensitive -- Urgent Security Notice --
Open Immediately.
"
The spokesman said he could not provide a copy of any of the letters. 
"With this many incidents and with the similarity of all of the letters, this is clearly a coordinated effort that was designed to terrorize our staff and affiliates.
And people have the right to know about it," the spokesman said. 
In a statement, Planned Parenthood President Gloria Feldt said: "It is perverse that these individuals here at home, who are themselves terrorists by virtue of their actions, would seek to capitalize on the events of the last days and weeks to further their own extremist agenda.
But this will not deter us from our mission of providing essential health services to women in this nation." 
"Whether a hoax or not, these are intolerable acts of terror, and every effort must be made to apprehend the perpetrators," Feldt added. 
Eric Robert Rudolph, the man charged with carrying out the fatal bombings at Atlanta's Centennial Olympic Park during the 1996 Olympics and at a Birmingham, Alabama in 1998, among other bombings, has been linked to the Army of God. 
A spokeswoman for the FBI national office had no comment on the investigation and referred calls to the agency's field office that handles Washington.
Calls to that office were not returned.
Rupert Murdoch's News Corp. ( NWS.N )( NCP.AX ) said on Saturday it was withdrawing its proposal to take over satellite television company Hughes Electronics Corp ( GMH.N ).
, after Hughes parent, General Motors Corp ( GM.N )., failed to choose a buyer at its board meeting earlier in the day. 
This leaves Hughes' rival EchoStar Communications Corp. ( DISH.O ) which was believed to be offering as much as $31.5 billion in stock and cash, as the only remaining party negotiating with GM and Hughes.
"We have no option but to withdraw immediately our fully negotiated and financed proposal," said Chief Executive Murdoch in a statement.
"Hughes would have been an excellent strategic fit for our global platforms, and we are disappointed with the Board's inaction in the face of an as-yet unfinanced counter proposal." 
Littleton, Colorado-based EchoStar is offering 0.75 a share for each Hughes share, and is believed to be lining up as much as $5.5 billion in cash from a credit lines supplied by UBS Warburg and Deutsche Bank. 
EchoStar is still interested in completing a deal, a source familiar with the matter said.
"GM needs to review some of the financing details before finalizing a deal with EchoStar," a source said. 
EchoStar and Hughes executives declined to comment.
GM did not immediately return phone calls requesting comment. 
For a year and a half, News Corp. had coveted Hughes' DirecTV satellite service as the U.S. component of its Sky Global network of satellite TV service, which stretch from Europe to Asia to Latin America. 
Had it succeeded in its proposal, the media conglomerate would have had a global distribution network for its vast array of programming assets, which include the Fox Broadcasting Network, Twentieth Century Fox film studios and cable channels like the Fox News Channel and FX. 
News Corp. planned to merge Hughes with Sky Global and spin the combined entity off as an independent publicly traded entity.
GM, which owns roughly 30 percent of Hughes, would have received approximately $4 billion in cash from News Corp.'s partners Microsoft Corp ( MSFT.O ).
and cable magnate John Malone, sources familiar with the matter said. 
But skeptics noted a combined Sky Global entity has no transparent value, which makes it difficult for Hughes shareholders to lock in a quantifiable premium for their assets. 
Should EchoStar be successful in its acquisition of Hughes, it would combine the top two U.S. satellite TV companies, bringing together DirecTV's over 10 million subscribers with EchoStar's Dish Network, which has more than 6 million subscribers. 
The combination of the top two U.S. satellite TV services is likely to raise eyebrows among U.S. Justice Department antitrust officials and congressional leaders, as it would limit choices for rural customers that don't have access to cable television, satellite's fierce competitor.
Murdoch has already started to fan these flames. 
"This means there will be no choice for millions of television consumers in rural America," Murdoch said in Saturday's statement. 
EchoStar has argued, however, that safeguards could be built into the deal that protect rural customers and that cable companies provide enough competition to keep a combined EchoStar-Hughes entity from having any undue influence in the market.
REUTERS
The Pentagon Sunday ruled out hostile fire as a cause of the fatal crash in Pakistan of a U.S. Army "Blackhawk" helicopter backing the first declared U.S. ground operation in neighboring Afghanistan. 
"Hostile fire has been ruled out as a cause of the crash, which remains under investigation," the Defense Department said in a statement identifying two Army Rangers killed in the crash Friday. 
They were Specialist Jonn Edmunds, 20, of Cheyenne, Wyoming, and Pfc.
Kristofor Stonesifer, 28, of Missoula, Montana -- both passengers in the helicopter
, the Pentagon said. 
Air Force Gen. Richard Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, described the two dead men as heroes, as well as all others taking part in "Enduring Freedom," the Pentagon code name for the military leg of the U.S.-led war on terrorism. 
As President Bush said Saturday, "They did not die in vain," Myers said. 
In a television interview, Myers dismissed as wishful thinking a Taliban claim to have killed 20 to 25 members of the U.S. raiding party in Afghanistan. 
The raid by parachuting U.S. special operations forces, including Army Ranger light infantry, targeted an airfield and Taliban leader Mullah Mohammad Omar's compound near Kandahar, Myers said on ABC's "This Week." 
Beside the pair killed, five other U.S. troops were injured, two in the parachute jump and three in the crashed helicopter, the Pentagon said.
The American-led air attacks on Afghanistan claimed a casualty at home on Sunday:
the 53rd Annual Prime-Time Emmy Awards, a show usually watched by millions. 
The Emmys, the television industry's equivalent of the Oscars, were postponed because of the attacks, and no decision has been made on whether to hold the show at a future time or cancel it altogether, the organizers told a news conference. 
Bryce Zabel, chairman and chief executive officer of the Academy of Television Arts and Sciences, said: "We're not at this point calling it a cancellation.
We're looking at all the options. ...
We've simply gone ahead and said for now we're postponing." 
He said the loss will be "potentially in the millions of dollars."
But he added: "This isn't about dollars.
This is about doing the right thing."
Earlier, a source close to the show said it had been canceled. 
Les Moonves, the head of CBS Television, said he had been in consultation with the heads of other networks and major figures in the industry for hours after the attack began to figure out what to do.
The three-hour Emmys broadcast was to have aired on CBS from 8 to 11 p.m. EDT and would have drawn top stars to the Shrine auditorium in Los Angeles and a studio in Manhattan. 
"There was a general feeling of people feeling uncomfortable.
It was not a day to celebrate, certainly. ...
It was the community really coming together and expressing the feeling that it would be the wrong thing to do this, to come together tonight," Moonves said. 
He said: "Certain high-profile shows and casts did not want to participate tonight.
We do not want to mention names. ...
They weren't being jerks.
They weren't being prima donnas.
They didn't feel appropriate about coming down here and participating. ...
I did not speak to one person today from the community who was passionate about going on." 
He added: "This is television.
It's really small potatoes compared to what's going on out there in the world. ...
It's a tough decision we've all had to make.
I want to go out and puke right now." 
The show's Executive Producer Don Mischer said its host, comedian Ellen DeGeneres, had been rehearsing when she learned of the decision and was quite disappointed.
"She put a lot of effort and a lot of time and a lot of personal emotion into this," Mischer said. 
The program had already been canceled once before.
Originally set to air on Sept. 16, it had been rescheduled for Sunday because of the devastating aerial assaults on the Pentagon and the World Trade Center on Sept. 11, which killed nearly 5,600 people. 
CBS spokeswoman Susan Marks had said earlier on Sunday, "The event is canceled," but had declined to give further details until the afternoon news conference. 
The only other time the Emmys were affected by world events came in 1978, when the ceremony was delayed by about 30 minutes by the announcement of the 1978 Camp David Accords by then President Jimmy Carter, according to a spokesman for the organizers. 
Because of national mourning, the Emmys presentation underwent a major transformation before the latest change of plan.
Actors had been asked to dress somberly in business suits instead of tuxedos, and actresses were supposed to wear modest dresses instead of ball gowns or other revealing apparel. 
In a normal week leading up to the Emmys, Hollywood is abuzz with gossip about which star is wearing what designer's clothes or who will be dripping jewels.
But this year, Emmy organizers had told reporters to expect a program that would match the mood of the country.
Now even that program may not take place.
Researchers reported on Monday they may have found a way to prevent lasting liver damage in virtually every case of hepatitis C as long as treatment can begin during the earliest stages of the potentially fatal infection. 
The report, which could affect the treatment of hundreds of millions of people infected with the virus, will appear in the Nov. 15 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine.
But the editors released the findings six weeks early because of the clinical implications. 
A team led by Dr. Elmar Jaeckel of the Hannover Medical University in Hannover, Germany, found they were able to prevent the development of chronic hepatitis C in 44 volunteers who were aggressively treated with injections of interferon alfa-2b while they were suffering from acute hepatitis C, the short-term version of the illness. 
In all but one case, daily interferon injections reduced the amount of hepatitis C virus (HCV) in the blood to undetectable levels. 
"We found that early treatment with acute hepatitis C with interferon alfa-2b alone prevented the development of chronic HCV infection in almost all patients" said the researchers.
Anyone with acute hepatitis C should receive the drug, they said. 
Dr. Michael Manns of Hannover, a co-author of the study, told Reuters the findings should encourage doctors to be more vigilant about identifying cases of acute hepatitis now that it is known that early treatment can prevent the development of long-term illness. 
"Everyone should be alert to diagnosing acute hepatitis C," he said. 
Nearly 4 million people in the United States and 170 million worldwide are believed to be infected with the hepatitis C virus.
Long-term infection is the leading cause of liver disease in the United States and, once it causes liver failure, the leading cause of liver transplants. 
Hepatitis C usually comes from sharing needles or through unprotected sex, although some infections can be traced to a transfusion of contaminated blood.
Blood banks now have screening tests for the virus. 
Symptoms may include fever, fatigue and nausea, but many people who develop an acute hepatitis C infection do not realize it.
Yet in 50 to 84 percent of the cases, the acute infection progresses to chronic hepatitis C, a process that can take up to 20 years, according to the Jaeckel team and epidemic.org, a Dartmouth College Web site on hepatitis. 
The researchers gave daily injections of interferon to volunteers for the first four weeks of therapy.
They received the drug three times a week for the remainder of the study. 
The doctors found that, on average, HCV had dropped to undetectable levels after about 3.2 weeks of treatment.
After two years, only one of the 44 patients had any trace of the virus in their blood. 
In a similar group of 40 untreated patients, chronic hepatitis C developed in 28. 
"Since the current treatment for chronic HCV infection eliminates the virus in only about half the cases," the researchers said, "we suggest that all patients with acute hepatitis C should be treated" with interferon. 
The interferon was supplied by Essex-Pharma of Munich, which paid for the study.
Two of the 10 authors have financial ties to the company. 
Senate leaders on Tuesday vowed to push for a bipartisan economic stimulus plan, rejecting a Republican-backed measure in the House of Representatives that had been criticized by Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill. 
Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle said the $100 billion plan approved by the tax-writing House Ways and Means Committee on Friday in a party-line vote was too costly and would not do much to provide an immediate stimulus to the economy. 
"I think we've got to go back to the drawing board," the South Dakota Democrat said.
"I'm hopeful that we can do that here in the Senate." 
The Republican-controlled House later this week is expected to take up the package that aims to inject $100 billion into the economy over the next year through business tax breaks and a payroll tax rebate for low-wage workers who did not benefit from the income tax rebates paid to taxpayers in the past few months. 
The White House on Tuesday urged the House to pass that bill despite concerns that it is too generous and promised to work with Senate Democrats and Republicans to make the final product more bipartisan. 
"The president does support that package," White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said of the House bill.
But he made clear the White House would press congressional negotiators to reduce its size to closer to the $75 billion set by the president, as well as to address other differences. 
"The president understands it's the beginning of a process, and he's going to want to continue to work closely with Democrats and Republicans to successfully complete the process," he said. 
Fleischer struck a more conciliatory tone than O'Neill who said on Monday the Ways and Means party-line vote last week was "show business" and that it contained more than what the president wanted. 
Lawmakers believe the economy needs a boost to help it recover from the shock of the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon, that killed nearly 5,400 people. 
The House package includes tax breaks for businesses that will allow them to carry losses back five years to reduce previous tax payments and write off purchases of computers and other equipment faster.
It also repeals the corporate alternative minimum tax and simplifies rules on gains from the sale of stocks and other assets, a change that will reduce taxes on some capital gains. 
A key provision of the bill is a rebate for wage-earners who did not earn enough money to benefit from the income tax rebates issued in the last few months as part of the $1.35 trillion 10-year tax cut signed by Bush earlier this year.
The bill will also accelerate some income tax rate cuts that were part of the earlier tax bill. 
The White House and Senate tax-writers have said they do not want a stimulus plan that will have lasting effects on budget balances and push long-term interest rates higher.
Borrowing by the federal government can have an impact on long-term interest rates such as mortgage rates. 
The House bill will reduce federal revenues by $100 billion in the current fiscal year which began on Oct. 1.
Revenues would be cut by $63 billion in fiscal 2003 and $49 billion in 2004. 
Senate Budget Committee Chairman Kent Conrad, a North Dakota Democrat, said the House package would give enough of an immediate jolt to the economy since 40 percent of the package will go into effect after the first year. 
He also said 40 percent of the benefit will go to the top 1 percent of wealthiest Americans. 
"I think the first (administration) response was the most accurate when Secretary O'Neill called it 'show business,"' Conrad said.
"That package is going nowhere." 
Senate Republican Leader Trent Lott of Mississippi also said he thought the Senate would have to make changes. 
"It is going to have to be fair and have things that both Republicans and Democrats feel strongly about," Lott told reporters.
"We are going to have to start making some decisions.
We may have to do it in some sort of high level discussion-like venue." 
Sen. Charles Grassley of Iowa, the top Republican on the Senate Finance Committee, said he was worried partisan action in the House would hurt the Senate bipartisan effort. 
"The fact that it (the House package) became a partisan document makes it more difficult for us to reach a bipartisan agreement in the Senate," Grassley said.
"I am hoping for a bipartisan agreement and hoping to have it within the confines of the president's numbers."
There is no proof that a mercury-containing preservative present in some vaccines causes developmental disorders in children, but doctors should steer clear of giving children vaccines made with the substance just to be safe, a panel of experts said in a report on Monday. 
The report by a panel convened by the Institute of Medicine, which provides advice on health issues to the U.S. government under a congressional charter, focused on thimerosal, long used in some vaccines and other pharmaceutical products to prevent bacterial and fungal contamination. 
The committee concluded that no evidence currently exists proving a link between thimerosal-containing vaccines and autism, attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder, speech or language delays, or other neurodevelopmental disorders. 
But the panel said it is "biologically plausible" that some children's risk of one of these disorders could be increased by exposure to mercury from vaccines containing thimerosal, which contains nearly 50 percent mercury by weight.
The experts said existing evidence is insufficient either to accept or reject the idea that thimerosal-containing vaccines can cause these childhood disorders. 
Levels of mercury, which can harm the nervous system, can build up in the human body with each exposure, whether from vaccinations or other sources such as contaminated fish. 
Very few vaccines used in the United States still contain thimerosal and many types of vaccines never contained it, the panel said.
But the committee recommended that, as a prudent precaution, vaccines that contain thimerosal not be used when vaccines made without it are available. 
"Most children in the United States being immunized today and in the future are unlikely to receive a vaccine that contains thimerosal," Marie McCormick, a professor of maternal and child health at Harvard School of Public Health who headed the Institute of Medicine committee, said in a statement. 
"In those few cases where only supplies containing the preservative are available, the vaccines should be administered rather than foregoing immunization.
While the health effects of thimerosal are uncertain, we know for sure that these vaccines protect against real, proven threats to unvaccinated infants, children, and pregnant women," McCormick added. 
The report was requested by federal health officials. 
The committee recommended that U.S. policy-makers weigh additional precautionary steps to reduce exposure to thimerosal.
The panel urged that government agencies and professional societies review their policies about nasal sprays, eye drops and other products that contain thimerosal and are used for infants, children and pregnant women. 
Thimerosal has been used in vaccines since the 1930s. 
But the three-in-one vaccine against measles, mumps and rubella (also called German measles) never contained the preservative, nor did the vaccines for chicken pox or polio. 
Several other vaccines recommended for children until recently were made with thimerosal.
The committee said these vaccines now are made without it, but an unknown, probably small number of vaccine doses remain on clinic shelves.
They include vaccines for hepatitis B, diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis (whooping cough), and haemophilus influenzae type B (Hib), a form of bacterial meningitis. 
A few vaccines, including influenza vaccine given annually during the viral flu season to adults and some children, still are manufactured with thimerosal. 
Thimerosal also remains in use in many other countries. 
Two years ago, the federal government and leading medical organizations urged new limits on mercury exposure of infants and young children -- a move that instigated the development of routine childhood vaccines made without thimerosal. 
The anthrax that killed two postal workers and forced the closure of mail rooms from the CIA to the Supreme Court was created in a sophisticated process that could have taken place in the United States or abroad, U.S. officials said on Friday. 
White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said investigators have determined that the pure, concentrated and highly dangerous anthrax delivered in a letter last week to Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle "could be produced by a PhD microbiologist and a sophisticated laboratory." 
"That does not rule out that it could be state-sponsored," Fleischer said at a briefing.
"That does not rule out that it could come from a foreign location.
But it certainly does expand it beyond state sponsorship or foreign locations." 
There could be as many as 40 places in the United States with the ability to produce the lethal version of anthrax that was mailed to Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle, according to Sen. Bob Graham, Senate intelligence committee chairman. 
"Most of them are associated with a university, a medical center or a veterinary center," Graham, a Florida Democrat, told Reuters. "
But I don't believe any source of this has either been ruled in or ruled out, sources within the United States or elsewhere." 
In other developments, U.S. health officials weighed giving anthrax vaccines to investigators, new traces of the germ warfare agent were found at facilities that handle mail for the CIA, Supreme Court and other government locations, and U.S. postal officials elected to keep open a large mail-processing facility in New York where small amounts of the bacteria have been detected. 
CNN reported that U.S. health officials have decided to provide anthrax vaccines for criminal investigators and decontamination personnel, who are considered at high risk of exposure to the bacteria.
The vaccine, its use currently restricted to certain laboratory workers and U.S. armed forces personnel, may be made available later to some U.S. postal workers, CNN added. 
Tests have found traces of anthrax in mail rooms that serve the CIA, the Supreme Court, Congress, the White House, the State Department and Walter Reed Army Institute of Research in suburban Maryland, as well as in the main mail distribution center for New York City. 
So far, three people -- two Washington postal workers and a photo editor at a Florida-based media company -- have died of anthrax in recent weeks.
At least 11 people have become ill, including a State Department mail worker who was in stable condition at a Virginia hospital on Friday with inhalational anthrax.
Thousands have been tested or treated for possible anthrax. 
President Bush inched closer to tying the anthrax attacks to Osama bin Laden, the Saudi-born fugitive Washington blames for the Sept. 11 hijack attacks that left some 5,000 people dead or missing. 
"We've seen the enemy in the murder of thousands of innocents, unsuspecting people ...
The terrorists cannot be reasoned with," Bush said as he signed anti-terrorism legislation into law. "
Witness the recent anthrax attacks through our postal service." 
A filter from the U.S. Supreme Court's off-site mail inspection warehouse several miles (km) away from the high court's building on Capitol Hill tested positive for the anthrax bacteria, court spokeswoman Kathy Arberg said. 
"We have no evidence of any contamination in the Supreme Court building," Arberg said.
But authorities were testing the Supreme Court's 400 employees for possible exposure to the bacteria and giving them antibiotics as a precaution. 
The anthrax-tainted letter to Daschle was the only one so far confirmed to have come through the Washington area.
Two others were sent to New York City: one to NBC News anchor Tom Brokaw and another to the New York Post newspaper. 
The New York postal facility through which those two letters may have traveled, the Morgan station near Madison Square Garden in midtown Manhattan, has tested positive for anthrax.
Traces were found in four high-speed sorting machines. 
But U.S. postal authorities turned down union demands to close the facility.
The Postal Service said the contaminated area was being cleaned and workers' health was not at risk. 
Postal workers have been offered the option of taking the antibiotic Cipro as a precaution.
About 5,000 people work at Morgan station, just west of Madison Square Garden.
William Smith, president of the 10,000-member New York Metro Area Postal Union, said employees "are taking their lives in their own hands" by working at the site. 
A "medically insignificant" trace of anthrax was discovered at the CIA's Material Inspection Facility (MIF), which handles incoming mail in Langley, Virginia, agency spokesman Bill Harlow said in a statement. 
No one at the CIA has shown signs of anthrax exposure, but the MIF was closed "in an abundance of caution," Harlow said. 
Two U.S. Army facilities in Maryland -- Walter Reed Army Institute of Research in Silver Spring and the U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases at Fort Detrick -- closed their mail rooms after anthrax was found at the Silver Spring site, just outside Washington. 
"We have a courier who carries mail between those two mail rooms three times a week, so to protect our own work force at Fort Detrick, we're looking at our mail room," Fort Detrick spokesman Charles Dasey said. 
Local officials in Washington also said they found anthrax traces in a postal facility in the southwest section of the nation's capital and expanded their testing for the bacteria to at least 2,000 smaller mailrooms around Washington. 
Officials said the postal service had begun environmental testing at 200 postal facilities along the East Coast and that random tests would be carried out at post offices nationwide as a precaution.
Tokyo stocks extended early gains by mid-afternoon on Thursday after a healthy rebound on Wall Street encouraged investors to buy back battered high-techs and auto shares such as Honda Motor Co Ltd, traders said. 
"Autos were among the first to be dumped after the attacks (in New York and Washington) as they depend on the U.S. market.
It's only natural they are the ones to rebound first," said Hiroshi Sato, equities general manager at Cosmo Securities. 
The benchmark Nikkei average was up 226.91 points or 2.28 percent at 10,191.79 at 12:49 a.m. EDT, while the broader TOPIX index rose 21.81 points or 2.12 percent to 1,052.98. 
Honda Motor, which relies heavily on the North American market for sales, surged 10.58 percent to 4,390 yen.
Its shares were still down some nine percent from pre-attack levels. 
Rival Nissan Motor Co Ltd followed Honda higher, trading up 7.34 percent at 585 yen. 
Thursday marks one month since the deadly attacks that leveled the World Trade Center and killed more than 5,000 people. 
Major technology stocks were equally stronger, with investor spirits cheered by a 3.57 percent advance on the U.S. tech-rich Nasdaq market. 
High-tech powerhouse Sony Corp soared 9.72 percent to 4,740 yen, while chip and computer maker NEC Corp jumped 8.32 percent to 1,094 yen. 
Cosmo's Sato said, however, that Thursday's gains were due in large part to short-covering prompted by U.S. gains. 
Uncertainty over the impact of the attacks and the military strikes in Afghanistan are hindering most investors in chasing shares much higher, he said.
The American-led air attacks on Afghanistan claimed a casualty at home on Sunday: The 53rd Annual Prime-Time Emmy Awards were postponed just hours before they were to air and be watched by an audience of millions. 
It was the second time that the Emmys, the television industry's highest honors and its equivalent of the Oscars, had been postponed in three weeks.
The show was originally scheduled for Sept. 16, five days after air attacks on New York and Washington stunned America. 
No decision has been made yet on when or if it will air at a later date, the organizers told a packed news conference. 
"We're not at this point calling it a cancellation," said Bryce Zabel, chairman of the Academy of Television Arts and Sciences.
"We're looking at all the options. ...
We've simply gone ahead and said for now we're postponing." 
The three-hour Emmy broadcast was to have aired on CBS from 8 to 11 p.m. EDT and would have drawn top stars to the Shrine auditorium in Los Angeles and to a studio in Manhattan, where New York-based nominees were set to attend. 
Zabel said the financial loss to CBS and the academy would be "potentially in the millions of dollars," since advertisers pay hundreds of thousands of dollars for a single 30-second commercial.
The show's production also requires months of planning and thousands of man-hours. 
But Zabel was quick to say: "This isn't about dollars.
This is about doing the right thing." 
The program was originally postponed after aerial assaults on the Pentagon and the World Trade Center on Sept. 11 killed nearly 5,600 people. 
The only other time it has been affected by world events came in 1978, when the ceremony was delayed by about 30 minutes by the announcement of the 1978 Camp David Accords by then President Jimmy Carter, Zabel said. 
Les Moonves, the head of CBS Television, said he spent the morning talking to scores of industry leaders, executives of rival networks and program producers, and the prevailing sentiment was to postpone the Emmys. 
"Certain high-profile shows and casts did not want to participate," Moonves said.
"They weren't being jerks.
They weren't being prima donnas.
They didn't feel appropriate coming down here and participating." 
Moonves, who said he had been at ground zero in New York just last week, tried to put the decision in perspective. 
"This is television," he said.
"It's really small potatoes compared to what's going on out there in the world. ...
It's a tough decision we've all had to make.
I want to go out and puke right now." 
Don Mischer, executive producer of the Emmys, said there had been no direct refusal by anyone to take part if the show had gone on. 
He added that host Ellen DeGeneres was "very emotional and somewhat devastated" when told of the postponement after rehearsing late into the night on Saturday and again early on Sunday morning. 
"She put a lot of effort and a lot of time and a lot of personal emotion into this," Mischer said. 
Zabel said security, which was as tight as for a presidential visit, was not an issue in the postponement.
He said there was no direct threat to the show and everyone involved felt comfortable with the measures in place. 
Because of national mourning, the Emmy presentation had undergone a major transformation before the latest postponement.
Actors and actresses had been asked to dress somberly in business suits and modest dresses instead of tuxedos and evening gowns. 
Mischer said the show would have included several emotional segments, including an opening by veteran newsman Walter Cronkite and a closing from New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani. 
One of the segments was to have shown how the world had supported the United States after Sept. 11.
That spot brought DeGeneres to tears, Mischer said. 
"I felt very good, and our team felt very good, about where we were because the awards were going to be distributed in kind of an understated way," he said.
"But we have six or seven emotional high points that I think would have meant a lot to the American people had we been on the air with them tonight." 
He and Zabel agreed that perhaps the most emotional tribute, taped just this morning, featured a New York policeman singing "America the Beautiful," backed by a chorus of 300 college students. 
"It was very emotional.
It was very emotional and seemed very appropriate at this time," Mischer said.
CHICAGO/LONDON (Reuters) -
Airline shares bounced back on three continents on Monday after European governments bridged a gap in war risk insurance and U.S. carriers were close to getting cash they desperately needed for the immediate future. 
Despite the share rally, the outlook for the global sector remained cloudy, analysts said.
No one yet is able to predict with any certainty how long the U.S. hijacked plane attacks on Sept. 11 and possible retaliatory action by Washington would hurt airlines' long-term ticket sales. 
In the United States, airline experts said the $15 billion bailout signed by the President on Saturday shifted the focus for survival to carriers that have the strongest fundamentals and less on how much money they have at this moment. 
"The battle of the hubs is on," said Salomon Smith Barney airline analyst Brian Harris.
"There are going to be some keepers that are going to make it through this." 
In an important signal, spokesmen for both Northwest Airlines NWAC.O and UAL Corp.'s UAL.N United Airlines said load factors, or percentage of seats filled, were back around the 50 percent level.
That means planes are still only half full, but better than last week, when one major airline said planes were only slightly more than one-third full. 
David Swierenga, chief economist for the Air Transport Association, told Reuters that carriers were still bringing in revenues that were only 50 percent of what they were before the attacks.
He said airlines were submitting data to authorities by noon EDT and may have wire transfers of up to half the available cash by today. 
"The airlines are really desperate to get this because there were several carriers teetering on the edge of bankruptcy," Swierenga said. 
Employee cutbacks, totaling more than 100,000 in the United States, were also continuing.
Delta Air Lines DAL.N , the only one of the majors which has not yet announced layoffs, said a decision on reductions at the No. 3 carrier would be coming soon. 
"It is all still very uncertain," said Deutsche Bank analyst Jonathan Wober, noting that even small changes in revenue would have huge effects on the profitability of an industry already operating with low margins and high debt. 
The survival of some U.S. airlines has been in doubt since the day of the attacks, but on Monday analysts wondered whether the damage would also push some already troubled European carriers over the edge, perhaps even "national" airlines whose existence has always been politically sacrosanct. 
One of those, Swissair Group SWSZn.
VX , said on Monday it was in a fight for survival and urgently needed $1.3 billion to $1.8 billion in new equity as well as radical cutbacks in its operations. 
And unions and management at another ailing national carrier, Belgium's disastrously unprofitable Sabena, in which Swissair is a 49.5 percent shareholder, were expected to resume talks on a restructuring plan. 
But share prices for the three largest European airlines -- British Airways Plc BAY.L , Deutsche Lufthansa AG LHAG.DE and Air France SA
AIRF.PA -- were all up, with BA up more than 10 percent at 167-1/2 pence, Lufthansa up 5.3 percent at 9.35 euros and Air France 13 percent higher at 10.15 euros. 
Prices also advanced for major Asian carriers, including Singapore Airlines Ltd SIAL.SI , Qantas Airways Ltd QAN.AX in Australia and Hong Kong's Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd 0293.HK . 
On the New York Stock Exchange, shares of US Airways Group U.N rose 69 cents to close at $5.24, shares of Continental Airlines CAL.N rose 85 cents to $15.51 and those of America West AWA.N finished up 34 cents to $2.84.
The top three carriers -- AMR Corp , United and Delta -- were up 5 to 9 percent. 
Until governments stepped in over the past few days, airlines had faced the risk of being grounded for want of adequate insurance.
Insurers had massively hiked premiums for certain types of coverage and reduced their potential exposure for third party war risks. 
The solution has been state insurance or state payments to offset the cost of liability coverage. 
In the United States help for airlines is set to be extensive, with the $5 billion cash and $10 billion in loan guarantees, as well as government-backed insurance against war and terrorism risk for the next six months. 
The extent of damage to each airline's operations varies greatly, but appears to depend a lot on how much of its revenue is generated on U.S. flights. 
British Airways, Europe's biggest airline and one of the most dependent on transatlantic services, said it was considering options for raising cash, including the sale of property, if losses from the attacks in the United States grew. 
Swissair, on its knees even before the attacks because of an unsuccessful expansion strategy, said the latest developments had forced it to lay off 3,000 people initially from its catering unit and to slash its long-haul aircraft fleet by a quarter. 
"Everybody has to make a sacrifice, otherwise this company will not survive," Chairman Mario Corti told Swiss radio. 
The possibility of airlines not surviving is exactly what analysts are contemplating. 
"There are bound to be a small number of airlines that are at risk of going bust," said Mike Powell from Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein in London. 
Almost two weeks after the attacks, only sketchy evidence is available on how badly airlines have been hit and almost none at all on how many frightened passengers have been deterred from flying in the longer term -- say, over the next year or so. 
Powell estimated that European carriers' traffic would not recover for eight months, and even then it would only reach its level of immediately before the attacks -- still less than what it should have been by that time. 
The attacks are expected to add to the cost of air travel because of extra security measures, further deterring passengers, and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines said on Monday it had begun charging a surcharge of $10 for each return flight. 
"It's a safety surcharge," a spokesman said.
"We have taken a lot of measures to boost safety, and that incurs costs." 
The attacks have also hurt the value of aviation asset sales.
The Australian government on Monday deferred the sale of Sydney airport until early 2002, saying the turmoil threatened to cut the $2.2 billion price tag.
The sale of Kingsford Smith airport had been due to be completed by the end of the year. 
A letter received on Monday by the office of Senate Democratic Leader Tom Daschle contained a powdery substance that tested positive for the anthrax bacteria, U.S. Capitol Hill police said. 
Daschle staffers exposed to the substance were being treated with antibiotics, a Capitol Hill physician told a news conference also attended by Daschle and Capitol Hill police. 
"I would say without equivocation our staff feels very confident about their circumstances," Daschle said.
"They have been given assurances that there is no immediate danger for them given that we were able to respond that quickly and as directly as we could." 
Earlier on Monday, President Bush said there may be a link between U.S. anthrax cases and Islamic Osama bin Laden, accused of masterminding the Sept. 11 attacks on the United States, but he said there was not any hard evidence of a link. 
"There may be some possible link.
We have no hard data yet
but it is clear that Mr. bin Laden is an evil man," Bush said at the White House.
"I wouldn't put it past him but we don't have hard evidence yet."
Goaded by new breaches of security at airports and an increasingly impatient White House, Congress on Tuesday began choosing negotiators to forge an aviation security bill both chambers can pass as soon as possible. 
House Speaker Dennis Hastert named the House members of a conference committee -- five Republicans and three Democrats -- charged with ending the House-Senate feud over whether thousands of airport security workers should be put on government payrolls. 
The House also passed a motion instructing the conferees to "make every effort to resolve all differences between the two houses as soon as possible, and no later than Friday, Nov 9." 
Hastert, an Illinois Republican, has said he wants legislation at the latest by Thanksgiving, when Americans normally fly in large numbers. 
But the Senate went home for the day without announcing its conferees, prompting one House Republican leadership aide to charge that "the Senate is slow-walking this thing". 
Aides to Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle rejected the charge and said the South Dakota Democrat would name the Senate conferees soon -- perhaps Wednesday. 
President Bush urged Congress to get moving on the issue.
But lawmakers appeared as divided as ever on how to make flying safer after an incident at a Chicago airport in which a man got past screeners with knives and a stun gun in his carry-on bags. 
"There is what I call a hardening of the attitudes on this," House Republican Leader Richard Armey said. 
Last week the House voted largely along partly lines to pass a Republican bill, backed by Bush, to increase federal oversight of airport security -- but without making the security workers government employees, as the Senate had voted unanimously to do last month. 
The differences must be resolved by a conference committee and any compromises it produces must pass both chambers before President Bush can sign it into law. 
Lawmakers argued vociferously over the implications of the weekend incident at Chicago's O'Hare airport, where Argenbright Security Inc. provides airport security services. 
Democrats said it demonstrated that private companies should no longer do baggage screening.
"I can't understand how we can be so nonchalant about what happened over the weekend," said Rep. James Moran, Democrat of Virginia. 
"We find this Indian Jones character with knives, with stun guns, Mace, getting onto a plane, having gone through the same Argenbright security system, the same system that the House would entrust the security of the public," he said. 
But Rep. John Mica, a Florida Republican and co-sponsor of the House bill, responded "we all agree that the current system doesn't work" and needed better federal oversight. 
The real issue was whether "the American people want a huge bureaucracy or do they want aviation security," Mica said. 
The White House urged Congress to compromise. 
"The president believes that the best system is a mix of public and private screeners ...
The president sees a compromise that can be reached," spokesman Ari Fleischer said. 
"The president is calling on Congress to get it done."
While the House bill keeps airport security workers in the private sector, it also gives the president the choice of moving some of them into the public sector if he sees fit. 
Republicans said this was offered as a compromise on the issue but Democrats rejected it as a fudge, claiming Bush would never in fact do it. 
The argument over how to improve airport security stretches back to Sept. 11, when hijacked airliners crashed into the Pentagon near Washington and New York's World Trade Center. 
The bill the House passed last week included an amendment that would extend protection against crippling lawsuits over Sept. 11 to everyone from Boeing Corp. to the landlord of the World Trade Center leveled in the attacks. 
But Armey said Tuesday that the conferees would consider whether amendments like the liability limit were "germane." 
The conferees named by Hastert were all members of the Transportation Committee.
The Republicans were Chairman Don Young of Alaska; John Mica of Florida, the aviation subcommittee chairman; Tom Petri of Wisconsin; James Duncan of Tennessee; and Vernon Ehlers of Michigan. 
The Democrats were James Oberstar of Minnesota; William Lipinski of Illinois; and Peter DeFazio of Oregon.
A judge on Wednesday acquitted a white Cincinnati police officer of charges related to the fatal shooting of an unarmed 19-year-old black man in April that triggered days of race riots in the city. 
Hamilton County Municipal Court Judge Ralph "Ted" Winkler, deciding the case without a jury, ruled that Stephen Roach, 27, was justified in the shooting of Timothy Thomas, whom the officer said he chased into a dark alley and shot when Thomas ignored orders to show his hands and appeared to go for a gun. 
Roach, who did not testify during a seven-day trial, had been indicted on charges of negligent homicide and obstructing official business -- the second charge related to his differing accounts of the shooting -- both misdemeanors that carried a maximum total sentence of nine months in prison. 
The shooting sparked initially peaceful protests alleging police were targeting blacks in the southern Ohio city of 331,000, 43 percent of whom are black.
Thomas was the 15th black suspect killed by police since 1995, a period in which no white suspects were killed. 
But the protests turned into three days and nights of rioting by roving gangs of mostly black youths who beat up motorists, ransacked stores and fought with police. 
Dozens were injured and more than 800 people were arrested in the worst rioting in the city since the 1968 assassination of the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr.
A dusk-to-dawn curfew finally quelled the rioting. 
On Wednesday, beefed-up patrols by the city's 1,020-member police force girded for the possibility of renewed violence. 
A few protesters carrying signs expressing contempt for police dispersed outside the courthouse after the verdict.
About 40 protesters subsequently disrupted a City Council meeting, which was recessed until police restored order. 
"There is no excuse for violence.
We are ready for the worst, but expecting the best," said Mayor Charles Luken, who has appointed a commission to examine the root causes of the rioting centered in the city's poorest neighborhoods. 
The U.S. Department of Justice, which began a review of the Cincinnati Police Department's policies and training in the wake of the riots, issued a preliminary statement earlier this week that said it had identified "areas of concern." 
Roach still faces possible disciplinary action, and Thomas' family plans to file a civil suit against Roach and the city. 
Thomas' mother, Angela Leisure, repeated her call for calm, but said Roach's acquittal could only worsen the city's problems. "
This situation will happen again unless serious changes are made by the police and the city," she said. 
The judge said Roach's actions were justified and that he did not suffer a "lapse in judgement" in shooting Thomas early on April 7 in the crime-ridden Over-the-Rhine section of town. 
"Timothy Thomas did not stop for any officer that night, including police officer Roach, and he failed to show his hands when ordered to do so by officer Roach in that dark alley. 
"Instead, he quickly reached in, or quickly pulled on his waistband.
At that time, police officer Roach's training took effect, and police officer Roach fired on Timothy Thomas, killing him," Winkler said. 
Prosecutor Stephen McIntosh said in his closing argument that an acquittal would send a clear signal that police should shoot first and ask questions later. 
According to testimony, Roach told investigators he had ordered Thomas to "show your hands" just before he opened fire.
In a tape-recorded interview three days after the shooting, Roach said: "He jerked and I jerked.
I was spooked."
But immediately after the shooting, Roach had told a fellow officer that his gun "just went off." 
Roach's defense included a psychologist who said the officer was under great stress from the incident and had no clear recollection of what happened other than that he shot Thomas because he thought the suspect had a gun. 
The judge ruled that the shifts in Roach's account were not tantamount to a crime. 
During the trial, Roach, a former high school football star, was lauded as a mature, highly motivated officer with a spotless four-year record.
Thomas was wanted on 14 minor charges, including running from police. 
Grain and oilseed giant Bunge Ltd.
BG.N said Monday that third-quarter earnings more than tripled, mainly on strong soybean processing profits, following an earnings jump at competitor Cargill Inc. last week. 
The results bode well for Bunge competitor Archer Daniels Midland Co. ADM.N , which was scheduled to report earnings after the close of trading, one analyst said. 
Bunge shares jumped $1.39, or 8.4 percent, to $18.00 Monday on the New York Stock Exchange.
Bunge shares have ranged from $15.20 to $18.60 since the stock went public at $16 in August. 
ADM shares rose 91 cents, or 7.4 percent, to $13.14.
ADM shares have declined 8 percent since the start of the year. 
White Plains, New York-based Bunge said it expects net income of $35 million to $40 million and earnings of 42 to 48 cents a share in the fourth quarter. 
The largest soybean crusher in the Americas and now the largest exporter of soybean products to China, Bunge reported net income of $57 million, or 76 cents a share, compared with net income of $17 million, or 26 cents a share, a year ago. 
"Obviously, we are very pleased with the quarter," Chief Financial Officer Bill Wells said in a conference call with analysts.
"We feel that prospects are very solid for our business going forward and the trends in the industry are going to benefit Bunge as we go forward." 
Soybean crushing margins are the main factor behind Bunge's higher earnings, said Jeff Kanter, food analyst at Prudential Securities. 
"After a five-year (industry) slump, soybean crushing trends seem to be going in the right direction in a meaningful way," Kanter said.
"The industry has taken a lot of capacity out and that is starting to flow to the bottom line." 
Bunge said net sales rose to $3.15 billion in the quarter from $2.7 billion a year ago. 
Income from agribusiness operations rose 165 percent to $130 million as soybean processing margins returned to historical norms in the main operating areas of Argentina, Brazil and the United States, Bunge said. 
Record harvests have kept soybean prices low and improved processing margins.
About half the soybean processing plants closed last year have since reopened, but oil and meal demand remained strong to help keep cash margins high, Wells said. 
"We closed plants to maintain margins and we are ready to do that again if necessary," Wells said. 
Income from fertilizer operations declined 6 percent to $64 million and sales volume fell 14 percent from an unusually strong quarter a year ago.
Bunge said it maintained prices, substantially offsetting the decline. 
Food products income from operations rose 25 percent from a year ago to $20 million as sales volume rose slightly, continuing a recovery from previous lower levels, Bunge said. 
"While there are a lot of moving parts, the company's agribusiness segment, the major piece of its business, is performing at a strong and, we believe, sustainable level," David Nelson, food analyst at Credit Suisse First Boston, said in a research note. 
Nelson retained a "buy" rating on Bunge shares and raised his fourth-quarter earnings estimate 1 cent to 42 cents a share. 
The Sept. 11 attacks on the United States pressured Bunge's edible oils and frozen bakery food service business, Wells said.
Sales volume has rebounded, but it may take a few quarters to work back to previous levels, he said. 
Bunge also announced that its board declared its first quarterly cash dividend of 9.5 cents a share payable Nov. 29 to shareholders of record on Nov. 15.
The company had 83.16 million common shares outstanding on Sept. 30.
In a rare public disagreement between two strong allies, the White House rebuked Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon on Friday for saying the United States risked appeasing Arab nations at Israel's expense, just as Hitler was appeased on the eve of World War Two. 
"The prime minister's comments are unacceptable," said President Bush's spokesman, Ari Fleischer. 
"Israel has no stronger friend and ally in the world than the United States, and President Bush is especially a close friend of Israel," he told reporters. 
He said U.S. displeasure had been communicated to Sharon by Secretary of State Colin Powell in a phone call to the prime minister as well as by the U.S. Embassy in Israel and Bush's National Security Council. 
Sharon on Thursday called on the United States and the West not to seek Arab support for a war against global terrorism at Israel's expense, citing the "dreadful mistake of 1938" when Europe "decided to sacrifice Czechoslovakia" to the Nazis. 
Israel, he said, "will not be Czechoslovakia.
" 
"The United States is not doing anything that would appease the Arabs at Israel's expense," Fleischer said. 
The dispute marked a rare public disagreement between the two allies since the Sept. 11 attacks on New York and Washington.
Israel is the largest recipient of U.S. assistance, estimated at $3 billion a year. 
Sharon's blast came after Bush said on Tuesday that part of his long-term vision for Middle East peace was a Palestinian state.
Bush said this had "always" been his policy. 
The New York Times had reported the Bush administration had planned a Middle East policy initiative, including endorsement of a Palestinian statement, that was derailed by the Sept. 11 attacks. 
Fleischer said the United States had been working for months to press the parties to end the violence and return to a political dialogue and "the United States will continue to press both Israel and the Palestinians to move forward." 
In response to Fleischer's comments, a Sharon aide, Zalman Shoval, said Sharon did not mean to imply the United States has acted dishonorably. 
"Prime Minister Sharon of course did not imply in any way that America and its leaders were dealing in a dishonorable way in the present situation as far as it pertains to Israel," he said. 
"What the prime minister intended was to make a warning to everyone, including ourselves, but especially to the leaders of the free world, that appeasement never works," Shoval said. 
Bush has been seeking support from Arab and Islamic nations for a coalition for his mission to bring Saudi-born militant Osama bin Laden to justice.
Bin Laden, the prime suspect in the attacks, is believed to be hiding in Afghanistan. 
Fleischer said Sharon's statement appeared to be in regard to the Middle East peace process, not the broader coalition Bush is building. 
He said Bush was not seeking an apology but would like to see a rededication of all the parties to achieving peace in the Middle East. 
"I repeat: Israel has no better friend than the United States.
Israel will continue to have no better friend than the United States.
" 
The State Department, commenting on the latest violence between Israelis and Palestinians, criticized both sides. 
"The Palestinians have failed to do everything they can to prevent the violence against Israelis, and we think the Israeli response, including the incursions into Palestinian territory, has been provocative," said spokesman Richard Boucher. 
"The Palestinian Authority must immediately take sustained and effective steps to preempt violence, to end shooting attacks, to arrest those responsible for planning and conducting acts of violence and terror," he said. 
"On the Israeli side, we think they need to refrain from provocative acts that can only escalate tensions and undermine efforts to bring about a lasting halt to violence," he added. 
"The deterioration of the situation is pretty bad right now and we're doing everything we can to get people to stop.
That remains a very difficult path and one that will require a lot of continuing effort," a State Department official added.
Britain tore down fortified watchtowers and Unionists moved to shore up Northern Ireland's collapsing provincial government Wednesday after the IRA's historic decision to disarm. 
Britain's Northern Ireland Secretary John Reid said work was starting on demolishing four key security installations in the province in the wake of Tuesday's move by the Irish Republican Army to destroy part of western Europe's biggest underground arsenal. 
Reid told parliament in London that work to demolish two watchtowers in the guerrilla heartland of south Armagh, close to the border with the Irish Republic, was "starting today." 
He added that work would start Thursday on the demolition of a British army base at in Magherafelt, in County Derry, and of security installations at Newton Hamilton. 
The installations -- plus the presence of 13,500 British service personnel -- are irksome reminders to republicans of British rule in the province, where 3,600 people have died in 30 years of feuding between pro-London Protestants and Roman Catholics seeking a united island of Ireland ruled from Dublin. 
Northern Ireland Protestant leader David Trimble renominated ministers from his Ulster Unionist Party to the power-sharing Protestant-Catholic government in Belfast.
It had faced a Thursday deadline for dissolution by London after the UUP pulled out last week in protest at the IRA's failure to disarm. 
Trimble said the final decision to return to the government would be taken by party members at a meeting Saturday.
Some hard-liners in his UUP party are doubtful about going back into government.
But Trimble said it was time to show good faith. 
"In the interests of good government and entirely without prejudice to the decision that will be taken by my party on Saturday I have earlier this afternoon nominated again the Ulster Unionist ...
ministers," he told the London parliament. 
Gerry Adams, leader of the IRA's political ally Sinn Fein, which hopes to blossom into a powerful "all-Ireland" powerbroker on the back of the progress on disarmament, said the watershed decision by the IRA had "liberated the process" of building peace in Northern Ireland. 
"The issue of guns is now where it should always have been -- within that part of the agreement which is set up to deal with that," Adams said, referring to the landmark 1998 Good Friday which set up the power-sharing government and also set parameters for disarmament and other key issues, like policing. 
"Politics is now going to have to rise to the challenge," he said after meeting in Dublin with Irish Prime Minister Bertie Ahern. 
But there were warnings from die-hard pro-British "loyalists" and from republicans alike that not everyone agreed with newspaper headlines trumpeting "The War is Over" -- that the IRA's decision to disarm had put an end to the conflict. 
British Prime Minister Tony Blair acknowledged as much when he told parliament: "Of course there is a risk from splinter republican groups ... and loyalist groups. 
"It is important obviously we take account of that.
But I also think it's important
we don't let any of those groups have any form of veto over the process of moving forward. 
"We do believe that yesterday's situation does change the situation significantly," Blair added. 
Tuesday, he said, was "the day when people understood finally that the gun and bomb have no place whatsoever in the future of Northern Ireland." 
Moderate unionists welcomed the historic IRA gesture, chief among them Trimble, who resigned as first minister of the province's executive earlier this year in protest at the lack of disarmament. 
His ministers recently followed, threatening the entire Northern Ireland power-sharing peace process, set in motion with the 1998 Good Friday Agreement, with collapse. 
But some hard-line Protestant Unionists were far from satisfied, particularly because the weapons were destroyed in secret, overseen by a body whose inspectors are foreigners and is run by a Canadian, Gen. John de Chastelain. 
"I'd like to see the 'milestone'," the Rev. Ian Paisley, leader of the anti-Agreement Democratic Unionist Party, told Britain's Sky television. 
"Even the British prime minister doesn't know how many arms have been put away ... and he's not going to know.
De Chastelain told me that the prime minister wouldn't know, nor would any of the list be given to him. 
"No British citizen was there, no member of the United Kingdom of which I am a member to tell me whether this happened or not.
If they did such a thing why all the secrecy?
If this is a milestone should we not be letting everybody see it?" 
Some renegade republican guerrillas also made clear they were not planning to lay down their arms. 
"There are other sections of the Republican Army still opposing Britain's presence on the island," Joe Dillon of the 32 County Sovereignty Movement, which speaks for the Real IRA, an IRA splinter group, told BBC radio. 
"They will no doubt pick up the mantle of being the IRA now and continue the challenge to Britain's occupation." 
The Real IRA, whose members split from the mainstream IRA over the Good Friday Agreement, has carried out a series of attacks in recent years, including firing a rocket-propelled grenade at the London headquarters of the MI6 intelligence service.
(Additional reporting by Michael Roddy)
An Israeli-Palestinian cease-fire was in tatters on Wednesday after Palestinian gunmen killed two Israelis and wounded about 15 during a surprise raid into a Jewish settlement in the Gaza Strip. 
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon convened a meeting of his inner cabinet to urgently review the situation a week into a truce plan battered by the deaths of 20 Palestinians, two Israelis, a car bomb in Jerusalem and many shooting attacks. 
He was expected to appeal to Palestinian President Yasser Arafat to immediately arrest in militants, more than a year after the start of a Palestinian uprising against Israeli occupation. 
Israel tightened a naval blockade of Gaza.
Sharon was also sure to hear calls from right-wing members of his coalition government to abandon the cease-fire and launch reprisal raids. 
The military wing of the militant Muslim group Hamas, which opposes the truce plan, claimed responsibility for the attack at the Alei Sinai settlement near Gaza's northern border with Israel in which troops shot dead three Palestinian gunmen. 
The attack was intended to show "the blood of the Palestinian people is not an open target for anybody," the Hamas raid unit said in a statement. 
Settlers hid in dark rooms and shielded children with their bodies during the attack, reaching out to check each other for blood or injuries. 
"I have no way of describing that feeling -- it was terrible...
We hid in the room, me with my gun pointing at the door and hoping that God would let us get out...," settler
Gabi Vinshelbaum told Israel's Army Radio. 
The Palestinian Authority condemned the raid but found itself on the defensive again, hours after celebrating comments by President Bush saying the creation of a Palestinian state was part of the U.S. vision for the Middle East. 
Bush wants the conflict to cool to make it easier for him to draw Arab and Islamic countries into a global alliance against terrorism after last month's attacks on New York and Washington. 
The army named the girl who was killed as Liron Harpaz, 18, a soldier from Alei Sinai.
Israel radio said the other fatality was a 20-year old Israeli man from the Israeli city of Lod. 
Israeli cabinet minister Tzipi Livni earlier had said the dead were around 15 or 16. 
Two of the wounded were in critical condition and at least seven soldiers were among the wounded, the army said. 
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon called it "another terrible act of terror."
"We are in a war here.
We are facing a very heavy war and struggle.
We are facing Arab and Palestinian attacks," he told a meeting of Christian Zionists in Jerusalem. 
Israeli officials said it was too early to say how Israel would respond or to predict the fate of the cease-fire plan agreed by Arafat and Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres at talks on September 26. 
The Palestinian Authority said Arafat had pledged to punish those responsible for the raid on the Jewish settlement. 
Arafat is under pressure from Israel and the United States to do more to rein in militants.
But Mahmoud al-Zahar, a Hamas political leader in Gaza, told Abu Dhabi Television he did not believe there would be mass arrests. 
"I don't think that the Palestinian streets will agree, and the arrest of one or two will have no effect," he said. 
The raid set back hopes that an end could be in sight to a 12-month-old conflict in which at least 607 Palestinians and 171 Israelis have been killed. 
Israel Radio said the gunmen had penetrated a section of an electronic security fence around the settlement that was not working.
Other media reports said they entered through the fence but had set off an alarm before shooting broke out. 
One settler, Avi Farhan, told Army Radio the settlement was celebrating its 18th anniversary when gunfire erupted and the army quickly ordered all residents to go inside their houses, turn off their lights and lock their doors. 
Palestinian gunmen often shoot at settlers on roads in the West Bank and Gaza.
Settlers, who live in fortified settlements built on land Israel occupied in the West Bank and Gaza Strip in the 1967 Middle East war, have also attacked Palestinians. 
Israel on Sunday gave Arafat 48 hours to enforce the truce he agreed with Peres.
Each side has blamed the other for violating the cease-fire deal. 
No. 1 U.S. grain processor Archer Daniels Midland Co.
(ADM) ADM.N , said on Monday that strong ethanol sales and better oilseed crushing margins helped boost fiscal first-quarter earnings 20 percent from a year earlier, topping Wall Street estimates. 
ADM rival Bunge Ltd.
BG.N also reported on Monday, saying third-quarter earnings more than tripled, mainly on strong soybean processing profits.
Last week, another competitor, privately held Cargill Inc., reported a sharp earnings jump. 
ADM, the top U.S. ethanol producer, reported net earnings of $131.6 million, or 20 cents a share, for the period ended Sept. 30, compared with $109.4 million, or 17 cents, a year ago.
The results beat analysts' estimates, which ranged from 10 cents to 17 cents a share with a consensus at 13 cents, according to research firm Thomson Financial/First Call. 
ADM's net sales and other operating income for the quarter rose to $5.5 billion from $4.63 billion a year ago. 
"ADM's long-term picture continues to be positive, with improving market supply conditions, stronger industry positions, and a growing ability to participate effectively in a broader range of global food markets," Chairman and Chief Executive G. Allen Andreas said in a statement. 
Virtually every unit showed year-over-year improvement with earnings from operations rising to $221 million from $114.6 million a year ago, mainly on oilseed crushing and ethanol. 
Cost reductions and facilities consolidation in the past two years has improved operating results, the company said.
Bioproducts, protein specialties and agricultural services also showed marked improvement from a year ago, ADM said. 
Market demand for soybean meal has risen, and ethanol's continuing replacement for methyl tertiary butyl ether, or MTBE, as a fuel additive also has increased profits, ADM said. 
First-quarter results included 3 cents a share loss from private equity fund investments, compared to last year's 1 cent a share loss on those investments.
ADM also reported a 5 cents a share gain from marketable securities transactions, compared with a 2 cents a share loss a year ago. 
ADM shares rose 91 cents, or 7.45 percent, to $13.14 Monday on the New York Stock Exchange.
The shares have declined 8 percent since the start of the year.
At least 17 people, including eight civilians, were killed and several were injured in scattered violence across India's restive Muslim-majority state of Jammu and Kashmir, police said on Saturday. 
Fighting has flared in the mountainous region since the United States began attacking Muslim militants in Afghanistan this month.
More than 150 people have died, mostly Muslim rebels whom India says have bases across the border in Pakistan. 
Defense Minister George Fernandes said India was plotting a new way to combat rebels more effectively, but gave no details. 
"The only way to deal with militants is to get rid of them.
We are working on a strategy that will enable us to be far more effective," he told the new Star News television channel. 
"The aim to clear the (area) of any kind of terrorist activity." 
The latest reported casualties included six civilians killed by militants who forced their way into their homes in Doda district late on Friday. 
In a village 10 miles west of Srinagar, Kashmir's main city, three militants holed up in a mosque fought a gunbattle with security forces.
Officials would not confirm reports that the militants in the mosque had been killed. 
Police also said four separatist guerrillas belonging to the Hizbul Mujahideen, a frontline separatist group, were killed in a clash with security forces and three civilians were injured during the exchange of fire in Rajouri district. 
A dozen militant groups are fighting Indian rule in Kashmir.
The authorities say more than 30,000 people have died in nearly 11 years of rebellion.
Separatists put the toll nearer 80,000. 
Muslim Pakistan denies accusations by neighbor and fellow nuclear power India that it is tacitly supporting the rebels.
The neighbors have twice gone to war over the dispute.
So far, the Boston Bruins are responding to fiery coach Robbie Ftorek. 
Byron Dafoe recorded 22 saves for his 23rd career shutout as the Bruins blanked the Washington Capitals, 4-0, Monday to open a season with three straight wins for the first time since 1994. 
Benefiting from a strong defense in front of him, Dafoe registered his 100th victory in a Boston uniform.
The Bruins kept the shutout intact by killing a 48-second 5-on-3 penalty midway through the third period. 
Dafoe's best stop came eight minutes into the third period when he made a blocker save on Jeff Halpern's partial breakaway. 
"We are playing well, not giving up odd-man rushes," said Dafoe, who has all but one of his shutouts with the Bruins.
"Robbie stresses defense and we have good defensive speed.
" 
Boston played without right wing Bill Guerin, who served the first of a three-game suspension for accidentally hitting Atlanta Thrashers center Patrick Stefan in the face with his stick in the third period of Saturday's game. 
Guerin scored a remarkable goal in overtime against the Thrashers, sweeping a backhander past goaltender Milan Hnilicka while lying on his back. 
But the Bruins did not miss Guerin on Monday, outworking the Capitals throughout.
Boston got goals from four different players, including power-play tallies in the second period by Sergei Samsonov and Joe Thornton, who also recorded a pair of assists. 
"Our guys answered the call," Ftorek said.
"It was a nice scrap.
We did a good job with penalty killing.
We were keeping sticks in the lanes.
Also, we won faceoffs, which were a key." 
Jaromir Jagr had four shots for the Capitals, but just one after the first period. 
"(Defenseman)
Hal (Gill) did a good job shutting down Jagr," Ftorek said.
"He was a pest all night." 
Washington was coming off a season-opening 6-1 victory over the Eastern Conference champion New Jersey Devils on Saturday. 
"We came out flat and we were outhustled," Washington coach Ron Wilson said.
"They clogged up the lanes and didn't give our guys a chance.
When we did get a decent chance, Byron played great and kept the puck out.
It didn't help that we took too many penalties." 
The Bruins have scored four goals in each of their first three games.
Their aggressive forechecking against the Capitals created nine power plays.
Washington was 0-for-7 with the man advantage. 
"Playing good defensive hockey is key," Thornton said.
"We scored off our good defense.
They underestimated us a little.
If we play like this every game, we will be fine." 
Thornton help open the scoring with a spectacular individual effort.
He skated down the right wing, then fought off a check with a one-arm pass in front to Martin Lapointe, who poked the puck past Olaf Kolzig with 5:12 left in the first. 
"Thornton can work with anybody," Ftorek said.
"Joe always gives you offensive chances.
Tonight he also backchecked well ... a real complete game." 
The Bruins made it 2-0 at 5:32 of the second when Samsonov took a feed in the slot from Thornton and snapped a quick wrist underneath the right crossbar. 
Just 73 seconds later, Thornton banged in a rebound of Brian Rolston's blast while falling down to make it 3-0.
Mike Knuble also scored off a rebound to complete the scoring at 5:13 of the third. 
"We played a full 60 minutes," Bruins defenseman Kyle McClaren said.
"We played with discipline and didn't take any bad penalties." 
McClaren suffered a bruised chest muscle with five minutes left in the second period when he delivered a crunching check on Halpern while trying to get to the puck to break up an icing call and is listed as day-to-day. 
Less then a minute later, the two players dropped the gloves and were assessed fighting penalties. 
The physical contest featured four fights, including one after the final buzzer when Washington rookie Stephen Peat and Boston's P.J. Stock mixed it up. 
Kolzig recorded 28 saves, including 15 in the first period when he kept the Capitals in the game.
U.S. Transportation Secretary Norman Mineta said on Tuesday he had asked federal agents to crack down on unacceptable lapses in aviation security and warned that airport areas would be re-screened and planes delayed when problems were found. 
Mineta said that despite the implementation of increased aviation security since the Sept. 11 hijack attacks there were inconsistencies that had seen a gun get through the screening process at the New Orleans airport last week. 
"This is intolerable," Mineta told state and local government transportation officials. 
He said an unacceptable number of deficiencies continued to occur.
"The result is a growing lack of confidence and increasing criticism of the actions that are being taken by the Federal Aviation Administration and I want to reverse that trend." 
Mineta has asked the Department of Transportation's Inspector General's office to provide special agents to supplement the FAA's 500 airport inspectors. 
"When we find ineffective or inadequate implementation of security measures we must crack down on those failures," said Mineta. 
He also urged Congress to pass aviation security legislation, calling for support of a bill being offered by Republicans in the House of Representatives that would have federal employees supervise private screeners. 
The Senate has already passed an aviation security bill that would make all airport screeners government employees but House Republicans have objected to a massive increase of the federal payroll.
Jeff Bezos, the ever-ebullient chief executive of online retailer Amazon.com Inc. ( AMZN ), said on Friday he remained optimistic about the Christmas season, despite widespread gloom, but declined to discuss his prior projection of turning a profit in the fourth quarter. 
"It could be a very promising Christmas season," Bezos told Reuters during an appearance in New York on Friday to flip the opening "switch" at the Nasdaq Marketsite on Times Square. 
In mid-afternoon Nasdaq trading Amazon shares were down 24 cents, or nearly 3 percent, at $7.91.
Earlier this week, the stock fell briefly to a three-year low of $6.85. 
Bezos has repeatedly stuck by his forecast that the Seattle company, which has never turned a profit, would be profitable in the fourth quarter, albeit on a basis that excuses a wide range of costs.
On Friday, he declined to discuss that projection. 
Wall Street analysts are forecasting a fourth-quarter result ranging from breakeven to a loss of 11 cents per share for Amazon, according to research firm First Call/Thomson Financial.
The mean estimate among 24 analysts is for a loss of 7 cents per share. 
Overall retail sales for the holiday season are forecast to rise 4 percent to 4.5 percent from last year's tallies, according to the National Retail Federation.
But that forecast recently has been ratcheted back from earlier projections of holiday sales growth of 5 percent or more. 
Bezos, meanwhile, pegs a lot of his optimism for the coming holiday season on new products. 
"I think there are a bunch of great new products coming out ... there are a lot of great video games and other exciting products around the corner," he said. 
During a Tuesday presale, retailer Toys R Us Inc. ( TOY ) and Amazon sold out the first batch of Microsoft Corp.'s ( MSFT ) up and coming XBox video game console in 30 minutes.
The XBox will not be available at retail outlets until Nov. 8. 
Amazon, which sells everything from CDs to kitchenware, has been adding more and more products to its catalog in an effort to boost sales and become profitable. 
Last month, Seattle-based Amazon opened the doors to its new online computer store, in times of slack PC sales. 
Amazon now offers computers from Apple Computer Inc. ( AAPL ), Compaq Computer Corp. ( CPQ ), Hewlett-Packard Co. ( HWP ), International Business Machines Corp. ( IBM ) and Toshiba Corp. ( 6502.T ). 
"For us, PC sales are incremental, we are very optimistic about PC sales," Bezos said.
REUTERS
A British soldier was injured on Friday when a bomb was thrown during rioting between pro-British Protestant gangs in north Belfast, police said. 
Petrol bombs and other missiles were thrown during the disturbances at Glenbryn Drive, a flashpoint in sectarian violence that has surged in the northern part of the capital in recent months. 
The solder's condition was not given.
Police said several people were treated for shock later when a small bomb was hurled at the back of a house at nearby road bordering a Catholic neighborhood. 
Security forces later found what they said looked like several pipe bombs and petrol bombs in a derelict house. 
The streets turn off Northern Ireland's most disputed walkway -- Ardoyne Road -- where Catholic "nationalists" and Protestant "loyalists" live cheek-by-jowl. 
Friday night's flareup jarred with a new climate of optimism in the troubled province's peace process after the Catholic-backed Irish Republican Army announced this week it was disarming. 
Britain is closing four security bases in response to the IRA pledge but troop numbers have not been decreased, partly because they are needed to back up police at flashpoints and due to a threat posed by renegade Republicans.
Thousands of Muslim protesters plan to flood the streets of Jakarta after midday prayers on Friday, the Islamic sabbath, to rally against the U.S.-led strikes on Afghanistan. 
At least two hardline Islamic groups who have vowed to expel foreigners from Indonesia, the world's largest Muslim nation, told Reuters they would call out their supporters for a fifth straight day of often rowdy demonstrations. 
"We will hit the streets.
We will also deploy our special force to ensure the rallies go properly," Islamic Youth Movement (GPI) chairman Suaib Didu told Reuters.
"About 10,000 people may join the rally.
Many groups say they do not want to miss this." 
Early on Friday, Jakarta was mostly peaceful but security was tight.
About 40 armored cars backed by hundreds of troops were positioned in the central Merdeka (Freedom) Square, across from the heavily fortified U.S. embassy. 
Jakarta police spokesman Anton Bahrul Alam said an extra 5,000 police, soldiers and civilian guards were on standby around the embassy, which was closed to the general public. 
The Islamic Youth Movement has signed up hundreds of volunteers -- men and women -- to fight against the United States in Afghanistan.
Didu said dozens of its more experienced members have already reached the central Asian state through Pakistan. 
The Islamic Defenders Front (FPI), which plans to hunt down Americans and Britons to expel them after the government ignored its demand to sever relations with Washington and its allies, will also hit the streets. 
"This is an expression of our anger to the arrogant United States.
We will rally every day until they stop (attacking Afghanistan)," FPI chief Muhammad Rizieq told Reuters. 
A U.S. embassy source said the embassy was concerned by the threats but was not aware of any efforts to hunt for Americans. 
Police have made clear violence against foreigners and wild rallies will not be tolerated and have said they would charge Rizieq for incitement. 
"Being arrested is my risk...
I am not worried about it," he said.
"My obligation as a religious leader is to say what is right and what is wrong. 
"We have not violated the law.
It's the police who have...
they ransack FPI tents and attack men who were doing their prayers in them." 
Many Muslim groups including mainstream organizations have slammed the government's refusal to condemn the air raids on Afghanistan in retaliation for the September 11 attacks on the United States that killed up to 5,600 people. 
Trying to tread a delicate balance between backing its key ally and appeasing Islamic radicals, Jakarta in its public comments urged the coalition to limit the attacks in Afghanistan to strategic military targets to minimize civilian casualties. 
The Islamic Youth Movement's Didu said he expected pro-U.S. provocateurs would try to provoke violence on Friday. 
"Certainly, there will be groups who want mess things up so that the police have a reason (to take action).
It's all planned by the U.S., you see.
And we are ready for it," he said.
Technology stocks rose on Wednesday as investors welcomed upbeat earnings from companies such as QLogic Corp ( QLGC.O ) but the broad market was flat, the dollar fell and long-term U.S. bonds surged as investors bet new economic data would point to further weakness. 
Oil prices rebounded, shrugging off data showing U.S. crude and product stocks rose and gaining amid speculation that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, OPEC oil cartel, may call for its fourth output cut this year. 
Technology stocks climbed on Wall Street amid guarded optimism about earnings and a lack of bad anthrax news, but the broad market's modestly higher finish reflected a mixed bag of quarterly results outside of the tech sector. 
The tech-laced Nasdaq Composite Index .IXIC rose 27.10 points, or 1.59 percent, to 1,731.54, the blue-chip Dow Jones industrial average .DJI gained 5.54 points, or 0.06 percent, to 9,345.62 and the broader Standard Poor's 500 Index .SPX inched up 0.42 of a point, or 0.04 percent, to 1,085.20. 
QLogic, a designer and supplier of storage area network equipment, soared $5.67 to $41.75 after reporting profits that met analysts' expectations.
Compaq Computer Corp. ( CPQ.N ) moved higher by 34 cents to $9.74, after reporting an operating loss in line with estimates.
Specialty software maker Citrix Systems Inc. ( CTXS.O ) jumped $3.31, or 15.5 percent, to $24.68 after it said its quarterly net income rose 28 percent to $27.8 million on strong uptake of its MetaFrame XP line. 
"People are thinking we're seeing a bottom," said Crit Thomas, head of growth equities for National City Investment Management Co.
"Some companies aren't revising outlooks down, and orders are looking better for others." 
But blue-chip stocks lagged as disappointing news from No. 1 photographic film maker Eastman Kodak Co. ( EK.N ) weighed on the Dow.
Kodak tumbled $3.46, or 10 percent, to $30.71 after it warned fourth-quarter profits would likely miss estimates. 
AT T Corp ( T.N ) also lost after reporting a sharp drop in profits and warned its core telephone business would take a hit through 2002 amid a weak economy and stiff competition. 
Enron Corp. ( ENE.N ) plunged, hugging the top spot on the list of biggest losers on the New York Stock Exchange, on concerns whether financial deals made by North America's largest buyer and seller of electricity and natural gas could negatively affect earnings going ahead.
Shares lost 17.08 percent, or $3.38 to $16.41. 
Outside the United States, technology and economy-sensitive cyclical firms led European shares to their third straight day of gains, but sliding oils sliced the advance as investors looked to a euro zone interest-rate cut on Thursday. 
Among the day's standouts, German airline Lufthansa ( LHAG.DE ) soared 7.5 percent after the government extended its guarantee on war risk insurance for the country's airlines by a month.
France Telecom ( FTE.PA ) jumped 6.2 percent ahead of third-quarter sales due on Thursday.
But drug giant AstraZeneca ( AZN.L ) lost 1.2 percent despite nudging up full-year forecasts after posting a seven percent rise in third-quarter profits. 
The Eurotop 300 index .FTEU3 of pan-European blue chips nudged up 0.15 percent to end at 1,207.15 points.
The narrower Euro Stoxx 50 index .STOXX50E gained 0.8 percent. 
Tokyo stocks closed mixed with several high-tech issues such as Sony Corp ( 6758.T ) falling prey to profit-taking, but banks, which had been left behind in the recent rally, were higher.
The Nikkei share average .N225 finished down 0.55, falling for the first time in four sessions. 
Treasuries rallied as investors bet that signs of further economic weakness and tame inflation would lead to more Federal Reserve interest rate cuts.
The Fed cut rates nine times so far this year in a bid to shore up the flagging U.S. economy. 
Prices on 30-year bonds surged more than a full point as the Fed's Beige Book, an anecdotal summary of economic conditions, supported those hopes by saying that the Sept. 11 attacks "sharply reduced" economic activity temporarily, but that the long-term effects were hard to assess. 
"The economy remains weak, the Fed remains in easing mode and there's certainly a lot of potential for shocks," said David Ging, strategist at Credit Suisse First Boston. 
Treasury prices drew fuel also as dealers reversed short positions to guard against price falls ahead of the more than $20 billion in investment grade corporate debt expected this week. 
At the 3 p.m. EDT (1900 GMT) settlement, two-year Treasury notes US2YT=RR rose 4/32 to 100-3/32, yielding 2.70 percent.
Five-year notes US5YT=RR rose 6/32 to 103-6/32 to yield 3.85 percent,
benchmark 10-year notes US10YT=RR were up 16/32 at 103-7/32, yielding 4.59 percent, and 30-year bonds US30YT=RR were up 1-2/32
to 100-26/32, yielding 5.32 percent. 
In energy markets, NYMEX December crude settled 48 cents or 2.2 percent higher at $22.33 a barrel, wiping out a 41-cent loss on Tuesday while December Brent also rebounded, finishing 35 cents or 1.7 percent up at $21.29 in London trading. 
Weekly inventory data from the U.S. Energy Information Administration showed a big rise in crude stockpiles, but the agency also reported that demand for refined products bounced last week.
This heartened the market, traders said. 
Meanwhile, Qatar, a Middle East producer, became the latest OPEC member to clamor for a 1 million barrel per day output cut.
Venezuela and Iraq previously called for a similar reduction from the 23.2 million ceiling applied to 10 members with quotas, excluding sanctions-bound Iraq. 
In currency markets, the euro rose against the dollar and yen, amid signs that euro zone inflation pressures might be easing ahead of an interest rate policy setting meeting by the European Central Bank on Thursday. 
The single European currency floated with view of session highs near 89.40 cents against the dollar EUR= , well off Tuesday's six-week low at 88.65 cents and nearly 0.40 percent higher from its previous U.S. close.
The euro posted its strongest gains against the yen, buying 109.75 yen EURJPY= , its highest in a week and up 0.60 percent on the day.
REUTERS
Compaq Computer Corp.
CPQ.N Chief Executive Officer Michael Capellas said on Wednesday that its pending acquisition by Hewlett-Packard Co.
HWP.N cleared hurdles with approvals by the Federal Trade Commission and an independent advisory group.
Printer and computer maker Hewlett-Packard plans to buy No. 2 computer maker Compaq in a $22 billion deal.
The FTC earlier on Wednesday approved the deal and Institutional Shareholder Services recommended to its clients who hold Compaq shares that they vote for the acquisition.
"I have continued to be more confident every week, virtually every week for the past month that has passed, and I think these are extremely important items.
They clear some hurdles and add some clarity," Capellas told Reuters in an interview.
"There is no question that there is momentum for the deal.
I am far more confident," Capellas said.
Capellas said that he'll continue talking to investors ahead of the March 19 vote for Hewlett-Packard shareholders and the March 20 vote for Compaq shareholders.
"What's left is to continue to keep a dialogue open with investors, customers, and employees.
Lots and lots of talking," he said.
BioPort Corp., the only U.S. maker of an anthrax vaccine, said on Monday it had filed final documents aimed at securing regulatory approval to resume distribution of the shots. 
The company, based in Lansing, Michigan, is seeking Food and Drug Administration clearance for a renovated manufacturing plant where it makes the vaccine.
Currently, the company is not permitted to ship any vaccine supplies made at the facility. 
"We're entering what we hope will be the final stages of a long, rigorous technical process," BioPort President and Chief Operating Officer Bob Kramer said in a statement. 
BioPort has an exclusive contract to produce the vaccine for the U.S. military, which has inoculated troops to protect them from a biological attack with anthrax. 
Currently, there is no vaccine for civilian use, BioPort said. 
Concern about anthrax is growing as letters containing powder laced with the potentially deadly bacteria appeared in three states and the District of Columbia.
One Florida man died after inhaling anthrax spores. 
An FDA spokeswoman said the agency was committed to reviewing BioPort's submission and inspecting the plant "as quickly as we can, while at the same time assuring that the safety and effectiveness of the vaccine is maintained."
She said she could not comment on how long that would take. 
Low vaccine supplies have forced the military to scale back its effort to inoculate all of its active and reserve troops against anthrax.
In June, the Pentagon announced that only special mission forces would receive the shot.
An anti-AIDS drug that has helped to control the illness in adults could also be an important weapon in battling the disease in children, British doctors said Friday.
Although more than 11 million children and young people worldwide are living with HIV/AIDS they have fewer treatment options than adults.
But a trial of 128 HIV-infected children in eight European countries and Brazil showed that the drug abacavir, made by drugs giant GlaxoSmithKline, works well in young patients.
"I think it could be a very important weapon.
It may be more useful near the beginning of treatment rather than leaving it as salvage treatment," said Dr. Diana Gibb, of Britain's Medical Research Council, who coordinated the study.
Abacavir belongs to a class of drugs known as nucleoside reverse-transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs), which interfere with the reverse transcriptase enzyme needed by the virus to replicate in the body.
It is usually given in a drug cocktail, in combination with one or more other drugs, that interrupt the life cycle of HIV.
Gibb and her team found that drug regimens containing abacavir were more effective than other combinations of NRTIs in children who had not been previously treated for the illness.
"It is a very useful drug which has a good formulation and can be used up front in children," Gibb added.
The researchers measured the viral load, the amount of virus in the blood, and monitored the immune response of children who had been randomly selected to receive one of three different combination treatments.
The viral loads dropped in most of the children but it was most significant when the youngsters received abacavir and lamivudine, another NRTI which is also known as 3TC.
"For the whole trial two-thirds of the children had undetectable virus in their blood at the end of the year but there were significantly more in the 3TC, abacavir group," Gibb explained.
Hypersensitivity, which causes a fever and rash, is one of the main side effects of abacavir but Gibb said her team did not see any reactions that were out of the ordinary.
Scientists do not know if the treatments can be interrupted or what the long-term side effects will be.
The results of the Pediatric European Network For Treatment of AIDS (PENTA) are published are in The Lancet medical journal.
Most HIV children acquire the virus at birth from their mothers.
Gibb said the latest figures indicated that 1,800 children were infected with HIV each day in Africa.
Many of the mothers were unaware that they had HIV.
Drugs and caesarean section operations have been shown to reduce the rates of mother-to-child transmission.
Martial arts master and international box office champion Jackie Chan has one more title to add to his already impressive resume -- stuntman life saver. 
One of the stuntmen who worked on Chan's blockbuster movie "Rush Hour 2" told Reuters on Thursday that Chan saved his life when a boat stunt on the movie went awry. 
"If it wasn't for Jackie, I would have died." said stuntman Chung Cheng-kai, who also goes by the first name "Andy". 
In a fight scene in the movie filmed about a year ago in Hong Kong, Chan kicked two people off of a moving boat.
One stuntmen quickly emerged from the water, but Andy got caught underneath the boat. 
Andy said his head slammed against the underside of the boat and he tried to avoid the propellers.
He struggled to get back to the surface, but he was trapped under the moving vessel. 
Just when he thought he could not hold out any longer, someone grabbed his arm and pulled him out from under the boat.
It was Chan. 
"I feel like a god grabbed me and pulled me out the water," Andy said, "A moment later, I would have been dead.
He save my life.
He give me second life." 
Born in Hong Kong, Andy first worked for Chan as a stunt double and fight choreographer in "Mr. Nice Guy" and since then has worked on Chan's "Who Am I?" , "Rush Hour" and "Shanghai Noon" .
Shrugging off new terror threats, President Bush traveled to a packed and patriotic Yankee Stadium on Tuesday to open the third game of baseball's World Series with a perfect strike. 
Hardly tough duty for the nation's No. 1 fan, attending the game was an important gesture for Bush, who has advocated Americans defy terrorism by leading normal lives in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 suicide plane attacks. 
Three F-14 fighters roared over the red, white and blue festooned ballpark.
After a moment's silence for those who lost their lives last month and for U.S. forces deployed overseas, a huge flag was carried onto center field by 60 cadets from the West Point military academy. "
America Fears Nobody -- Play Ball," read a sign in the upper deck. 
A bald eagle released from atop the scoreboard swooped gracefully to the pitchers' mound.
Bush stepped up wearing a a navy Fire Department of New York windbreaker.
He tossed the ceremonial pitch across the plate and into the glove of Yankee catcher Jorge Posada, winning hearty hugs and backslaps from two of the game's greats, Yogi Berra and Whitey Ford. 
"This is part of the balance our society is coming to understand, that as threats are received, as security is beefed up, it similarly is important for (Americans) to go about their normal life," White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said.
"No one has ever been able to make the American people cower." 
As Bush left the White House, he told reporters he hoped the series would go the full seven games, and by the time he boarded the presidential aircraft at Andrews Air Force Base, he was limbering up his right arm. 
Since the attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon, Bush has urged Americans to go about business as usual, to take vacations, to fly again and to go to ballparks, all the while remaining on alert. 
But the only norms in New York, where about 4,500 people died at the World Trade Center, are that this is October and the Yankees are in major league baseball's World Series again. 
The federal government on Monday issued a second warning that there may be new terror attacks on the United States or its interests over the next week.
The alert came amid a spate of anthrax incidents that killed three people and left many fearing more assaults could include biological warfare. 
The World Trade Center is still smoldering, the dead are still being mourned and New Yorkers are still coming to grips with the gaping hole in their skyline left after the 110-story twin towers were demolished by two hijacked aircraft. 
The legendary Yankees, World Series winners four out of the past five years, are in a 0-2 hole to the Arizona Diamondbacks, an upstart expansion team.
They were two games down to the Atlanta Braves in the best-of-seven World Series five years ago and stormed back to win four in a row. 
Security for Bush's visit -- the first game of this series to be played in New York -- was tight.
Metal detectors and other checks delayed many fans getting to their seats and the lines outside the stadium were long.
Backpacks were confiscated. 
Law enforcement sources said almost 2,000 police officers on foot, horseback and motorcycles were on duty in and around the Bronx ballpark, snipers were stationed on nearby rooftops and bomb-sniffing dogs were used. 
Bush flew into John F. Kennedy International Airport and then by helicopter along the East River against the backdrop of Manhattan's skyline, landing just yards from Yankee Stadium. 
A former part-owner of the Texas Rangers who never saw his ball club go to a World Series
, Bush has not been a fan of the Yankees in the past.
But if he was hoping for a Diamondbacks' victory, it remained a diplomatic secret. 
Fleischer, a die-hard Yankee supporter, dodged the delicate issue, telling reporters, "The president at tonight's game will be proudly rooting for the Texas Rangers." 
Bush's visit to New York rounded out a presidential triple header.
Earlier this year, he attended Little League Baseball's World Series in Williamsport, Pennsylvania, and the College World Series in Omaha, Nebraska. 
A lifelong fan, Bush brought baseball -- or at least a child's version of it -- to the White House South Lawn in the spring, hosting T-Ball games between teams of local children too young for Little League. 
In March, he held a Baseball Hall of Fame lunch at the White House for about 50 of the game's greatest players.
A few months later, Bush, who said he once dreamed of being like celebrated Giants' center fielder Willie Mays but never president, became the first chief executive to be inducted into the Little League Hall of Excellence.
Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld left Moscow for former Soviet Central Asia on Saturday after talks in the Kremlin on support by Russia's intelligence services for the U.S. military campaign in Afghanistan. 
"Today we discussed the specific levels of our cooperation," Russian Defense Minister Sergei Ivanov told reporters after attending a meeting between Rumsfeld and President Vladimir Putin. 
"To a large part it concerns Russia's use of special services and here I cannot comment any further," said Ivanov, who earlier held separate talks with his U.S. counterpart. 
Russia, while backing Washington's anti-terrorism campaign, has ruled out any involvement of its armed forces in the U.S.-led operation.
It was clear that by "special services" Ivanov was referring to intelligence agents and not special operations commandos. 
Rumsfeld's eight-hour visit to Moscow was the first leg of a whirlwind four-day tour of five countries for talks on the war on terrorism, the Pentagon said. 
He was headed for Tajikistan from Moscow and was also to visit Uzbekistan and Pakistan, which also border Afghanistan, and India. 
Russia has sided with the United States in efforts to form a global anti-terrorism coalition.
It has also backed the U.S. military campaign aimed at wiping out the ruling Taliban, which harbors Saudi-born dissident Osama bin Laden -- blamed by Washington for the September 11 attacks on the United States. 
Supplying intelligence information to the United States about terrorist organizations and Afghanistan was part of Russia's contribution to the war. 
With a U.S. summit meeting scheduled in 10 days with President Bush, Putin was eager to underscore the increasing warmth in the relationship. 
He told Rumsfeld he was impressed by the level of cooperation between the two powers' military and special services, referred to in Russia as "power structures." 
"After the meeting with the U.S. President in Shanghai we witnessed a further rapprochement between the power structures including special services," he said referring to his encounter with Bush on the fringes of the regional summit in China. 
But Ivanov, mindful of the Russian public and the trauma of Moscow's 10-year armed intervention in Afghanistan which cost thousands of Russian lives, once again emphasized that Russian troops would not be sent to Afghanistan. 
"I see no reason why we should change our position," he said. 
Russia has also encouraged its Central Asian allies to back the U.S. military effort.
Uzbekistan, Tajikistan and another Afghan neighbor
Turkmenistan have pledged airspace and bases for U.S. search-and-rescue and humanitarian operations. 
RIA news agency said Rumsfeld could visit Khanabad air base in Uzbekistan, where more than 1,000 U.S. troops are based. 
Cooperation in the war against terror has created a better climate for sorting out issues which soured ties between Moscow and Washington in the early months of Bush's administration. 
The main sticking point has been U.S. missile defense plans, which run counter to the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile pact because it limits such systems.
Washington wants the ABM pact to be scrapped as a relic of the Cold War. 
After the September attacks Bush appeared even more committed to plans to set up an umbrella shield against missile attacks from so-called "rogue states.
" Talks about the ABM treaty will figure in the summit in Washington and at Bush's Texas ranch from November 13-15. 
The Washington Post said on Thursday Bush and Putin were likely to announce a deal to allow testing of a missile defense system and cut strategic nuclear warheads without dumping the ABM treaty. 
Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov, fresh from talks with Secretary of State Colin Powell, said on Friday it was premature to speak of such accords. 
However, defense minister Ivanov indicated that Russia was ready for some kind of compromise. 
"The ABM is an important but not the only component of strategic stability," he said.
"We have been often told in the past that the ABM treaty is a relic of the Cold War.
In part, and I repeat in part, I agree with this." 
"But all Russian-U.S. agreements are, to a certain extent, relics of the Cold War," Ivanov added. 
"Russia and the United States understand that we should look into the future together.
But before dropping any one agreement...we believe it is better to do so when something new is already in place."
A top media executive on Monday said 1 million movie files were downloaded illegally on the Internet each day and called for a renewed crackdown on online file-services that promote digital piracy.
"Our content must be protected from unencrypted, illegal file sharing," Peter Chernin, president and chief operating officer of News Corporation, told an assembly of media executives at the FT New Media and Broadcasting Conference in London.
"We're in the process of raising a generation to think that stealing is okay," he added.
Chernin said the media industry must play a more active role in educating youths about the legal implications of using peer-to-peer, or P2P, networks such as Grokster and Morpheus Music City to trade music and movie files via the click of a mouse.
He said there were technological stop-gaps available to protect digital television and satellite broadcasts from online pirate broadcasters.
But the so-called P2P services were more difficult to stop, he said.
Media companies have fought a losing battle so far in their attempts to block unauthorized copying and distribution of copyrighted material over the Internet.
Lately, media executives have sought help from U.S. lawmakers and pleaded with consumers at public forums, including last week's Grammy Awards broadcast, to refrain from swapping music and movie files over high-speed Internet connections.
The campaign coincides with efforts by media companies to transform their loss-making Internet units into profitable, subscription-based platforms.
But not everybody sees new technologies as a threat to copyright-protected content.
Ashley Highfield, director of new media and technology at the British Broadcasting Corporation said new advancements in set-top box and recordable DVD players would enable consumers to download television programs that can then be "burned" on to a disk and played on any computer.
"And the BBC will be ready for it," he said.
Meanwhile, Jeffrey Chester, executive director of media watchdog group Centre for Digital Democracy, accused major media companies of using the digital piracy issue to assert more control over online distribution of media content.
When not lamenting the growing scourge of digital piracy, media executives on Monday were doing their best to bury the old ad-supported business model that was the blueprint of so many failed dot-coms.
Chernin, for one, told conference attendees that Internet media currently has "no viable economic model."
He added that the News Corp. Internet strategy was to roll out more subscription-based online media services, such as The London Times' online crossword puzzles and Web news archives.
The company's free sites, which include Foxnews.com in the United States, are regarded as "promotional adjuncts" now, he said.
"They are a taste for what (consumers) will eventually have to pay for in the future," he added.
For the first time in five years the dawn call to prayers competed with the sound of music as residents of the Afghan capital, Kabul, awoke to life after the Taliban but with little clue to the shape of a new government. 
Triumphant opposition Northern Alliance fighters walked the streets down which the Taliban fled a day earlier. 
U.S. jets stalked the skies, hunting down bands of fleeing fighters of the fundamentalist militia, allowing them no refuge as they retreated south toward their spiritual capital, Kandahar, or into the heartland of their Pashtun people. 
On day 39 of the U.S. bombing campaign to punish the Taliban for sheltering Osama bin Laden, the Saudi-born militant remained free in the forbidding and inhospitable mountains of Afghanistan and U.S. special forces also headed south in their hunt. 
His protector, Taliban supreme leader Mullah Mohammad Omar, vowed defiance and called on his troops not to desert. 
Defections to the Northern Alliance, composed mainly of minority Uzbeks and Tajiks, by the mainly Pashtun Taliban were believed to have fueled the opposition's lightning race to triumph across the north and west of the country, bringing the fall of the capital after a ground war lasting just four days. 
Such was the speed of the advance that it caught even the alliance's U.S. backers off guard as the motley opposition mujahideen, or holy warriors, swept into Kabul on armored personnel carriers, in trucks and even in taxis with barely a shot fired on Tuesday. 
Northern Alliance Foreign Minister Abdullah Abdullah, at his first news conference in Kabul late on Tuesday, said his forces had entered Kabul to maintain security after the unexpected Taliban retreat, despite international appeals for them to wait. 
The United Nations and all groups, except the Taliban, would be invited to Kabul for talks on a future government, he said. 
"There is no place for the Taliban movement in any possible political settlement in Afghanistan," ousted president Burhanuddin Rabbani told Qatar's al-Jazeera television station. 
"God willing, tomorrow I will be in Kabul," he said late on Tuesday. 
The dawn call to prayers on the a day after Kabul's fall, in the pattern of its rapid capture by the Taliban from the same mujahideen in 1996, awoke Kabul residents to uncertainty. 
Factions in the Northern Alliance split the city along ethnic lines within hours of their entry -- a sign Kabul could be reverting to the patchwork divisions that sparked power struggles and civil war when the same groups took over from the Soviet-installed government in 1992. 
Many Kabul residents just seemed pleased to be able to switch their radios to any channel they wanted or to have their beards shaved for the first time in five years to mark the end of the draconian rules of a militia that imposed its interpretation of a 1,300-year-old Islamic Utopia on 20 million Afghans. 
But people were nervous, and pick-up trucks filled with anti-Taliban soldiers armed with Kalashnikov rifles and shoulder-held rocket launchers patrolled the streets. 
"It's okay for now, but people largely don't feel comfortable and reassured about this situation.
It may change any day," said one resident as he watched the opposition roll by. 
"It is calm now but may not remain the same probably in the coming days," he said. 
"There was no option for us but to send our security forces into Kabul," Abdullah said, adding the alliance had some 6,000 security forces and troops around the capital. 
He said 8,000 Taliban forces had pulled out of Kabul by about midnight on Monday. 
With Kabul in anti-Taliban hands and the western city of Herat taken, the way was open for an advance on Kandahar.
Anti-Taliban tribal leader Hamid Karzai told Reuters by satellite phone the opposition had already taken the airport. 
Opposition leaders said Kandahar could fall within 24 hours as moderate Taliban forces abandoned the hard-liners. 
The Taliban said they had strategically withdrawn from the areas lost. 
They took with them eight Western aid workers -- two Americans, two Australians and four Germans -- facing charges of promoting Christianity. 
The United States said the war was far from over even as the difficult task of settling the political peace began in Kabul. 
Washington had appealed to the alliance not to enter Kabul. 
The alliance is unpopular in the capital where residents remember the power struggles among opposition leaders in the 1990s that unleashed almost daily rocket attacks on the city and killed about 50,000 residents. 
"If Kabul is demilitarized that will be good," said one young man. 
Asked about the formation of a future Afghan government, Abdullah said the alliance invited the United Nations and all Afghan groups to send representatives to Kabul for talks. 
"Taliban excluded," he said. 
The United States had wanted a broad agreement on the structure of any post-Taliban government before the alliance entered Kabul.
Neighboring Pakistan wants a role for what it calls moderate Taliban. 
There have been few signs of progress on a deal.
The United Nations wants an urgent meeting of Afghan leaders. 
In Rome, a senior adviser to Afghanistan's exiled former king, Zahir Shah, seen as a key player in the political future, said the Northern Alliance had broken an agreement with the monarch by entering Kabul. 
"He (Zahir Shah) can return to Afghanistan but only as an ordinary citizen," the ousted Rabbani told al-Jazeera television.
The Pentagon on Wednesday gave orders to move as many as 100 or more U.S. warplanes toward the Middle East and Indian Ocean in response to last week's devastating attack on America, defense officials said. 
They said dozens of bombers, fighters and support aircraft were expected to soon begin moving toward bases in or near the vast area in the first military deployment of President Bush's declared "war on terrorism". 
The officials, who asked not to be identified, said two planned warplane deployment orders from Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld were initial steps in a military effort named "Operation Infinite Justice" to punish those responsible for ramming hijacked airliners into the Pentagon and New York's World Trade Center on Sept. 11. 
The Navy on Wednesday also sent an additional aircraft carrier toward the region from Virginia, a move that along with the air deployment could place up to 500 U.S. warplanes in the Mediterranean, Gulf and Indian Ocean areas for what Washington has suggested could be a possible strike against Afghanistan. 
Washington has accused Afghanistan's ruling Taliban of harboring fugitive guerrilla leader Osama bin Laden, who the White House says is a prime suspect in last week's coordinated attacks. 
"The United States is repositioning some of its forces to support the President's goal" of punishing the culprits and any states found to harbor or support them, White House National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice said. 
She refused to elaborate, but Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz told reporters at the Pentagon that "there will be more deployments."
Private defense experts say those are expected to include elite U.S. Special Operations troops. 
Nearly 200 U.S. Air Force warplanes are already stationed at bases in the Gulf, Turkey and the Indian Ocean region and the new movement is expected to push that land-based total to about 300. 
In addition to the Air Force planes, the aircraft carriers Theodore Roosevelt, Carl Vinson and Enterprise carry more than 210 Navy strike and support aircraft. 
The Roosevelt sailed from Norfolk on Wednesday for the Mediterranean.
The Vinson is now in the Gulf and the Enterprise in the Indian Ocean. 
Defense officials confirmed reports by CNN that the air strike force, much of it to be deployed from the continental United States, would include F-15E attack jets, F-16 fighters, probably swing-wing B-1 bombers and support planes such as refueling aircraft and radar-control planes. 
One official refused to rule out movement of sophisticated B-2 "stealth" bombers to the region, although such aircraft could be flown round-trip directly from the United States on bombing missions. 
The Pentagon confirmed that Rumsfeld had on Wednesday signed at least one initial deployment order for U.S. military forces to begin moving, but refused to provide details of those movements, which experts have said could include Special Operations troops to hunt down bin Laden. 
"The United States is repositioning some of its military forces where required to prepare for and support the president's campaign against terrorism and to support efforts to identify, locate and hold accountable terrorists and those who support and harbor them," Pentagon spokesman Bryan Whitman told reporters. 
Wolfowitz, asked by reporters at the Pentagon about the deployment, would say only: "There are movements and there will be more movements.
And I hope that everyone understands -- I'm sure the American people understand -- why we do not want to reveal the details of those movements to people who may be trying to figure out what we are about to do next." 
He said the new "war on terrorism" needed to be an integrated strategy using diplomacy, financial pressure and military force. 
"If we do act militarily, we will act militarily as part of that strategy and to support those goals -- not simply for the sake of satisfying what is understandably an enormous urge by the American people ... for revenge," Wolfowitz said. 
"We are after something more than revenge.
We are after dealing with and eliminating this threat to civilization." 
Rupert Murdoch's News Corp. said on Saturday it was withdrawing its proposal to take over satellite television company Hughes Electronics Corp. , after Hughes' parent, General Motors Corp. , failed to choose a buyer at its board meeting earlier in the day. 
News Corp.'s proposal competed with a bid by EchoStar Communications Corp., which was believed to be offering as much as $31.5 billion in stock and cash. 
"We have no option but to withdraw immediately our fully negotiated and financed proposal," said Chief Executive Murdoch in a statement.
"Hughes would have been an excellent strategic fit for our global platforms, and we are disappointed with the Board's inaction in the face of an as-yet unfinanced counter proposal." 
Littleton, Colorado-based EchoStar is offering 0.75 a share for each Hughes share, and is believed to be lining up as much as $5.5 billion in cash from a credit line supplied by UBS Warburg and Deutsche Bank.
EchoStar and Hughes declined to comment.
GM did not immediately return phone calls requesting comment. 
For a year and a half, News Corp. had coveted Hughes' DirecTV satellite service as the U.S. component of its Sky Global network of satellite TV service, which stretches from Europe to Asia to Latin America.
Had it succeeded in its proposal, the media conglomerate would have had a global distribution network for its vast array of programming assets, which include the Fox Broadcasting Network, Twentieth Century Fox film studios and cable channels like the Fox News Channel and FX. 
News Corp. planned to merge Hughes with Sky Global and spin the combined entity off as an independent publicly traded entity.
GM, which owns roughly 30 percent of Hughes, would have received approximately $4 billion in cash from News Corp.'s partners Microsoft Corp. and cable magnate John Malone.
President Bush has no plans to meet Palestinian President Yasser Arafat on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly in New York this weekend, the White House said on Tuesday. 
"There are no plans for any such meeting," White House spokesman Ari Fleischer told reporters in response to a question at his daily briefing. 
Israeli-Palestinian peace talks have been frozen for months but the two sides have been under intense pressure to end fighting as the United States seeks to bolster Arab and Islamic support for its anti-terror campaign in Afghanistan. 
At least 697 Palestinians and 186 Israelis have been killed since the Palestinian revolt began in September 2000 after peace negotiations pushed by former U.S. President Bill Clinton broke down. 
The White House said Bush remained engaged in pressing for peace in the Middle East and suggested the president saw no reason to meet Arafat now. 
"The president has made it very clear that whenever he thinks that the time is right for any meetings with anybody that would be most helpful to seizing any particular moment or any openings, if there are any openings, that the president would be prepared to do so," Fleischer said.
"The president will continue to actively engaged in the Middle East." 
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon postponed indefinitely his visit to the United States later this month citing the security situation.
Early human data suggest two HIV vaccines being developed by Merck & Co. may help control the virus that causes AIDS, yet it remains to be seen whether they can prevent infection, researchers said on Tuesday.
If later-stage trials indeed prove the vaccines can tame the deadly virus, researchers said they might someday be used to improve treatment for HIV-infected people who are already taking cocktails of drugs to ward off AIDS symptoms.
Merck researchers, who have been working for 15 years to develop HIV vaccines, unveiled the encouraging preliminary human data at the annual meeting of the Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections being held in Seattle.
The results come on the heels of previously published animal studies of similar Merck vaccines, which effectively controlled a virus that causes AIDS-like symptoms in monkeys, but did not prevent infection of monkeys with the virus.
In the human trials described today, HIV-negative volunteers were given vaccines containing a gene that codes for production of the so-called gag protein found inside HIV.
The gene is unattached to anything else, and hence "naked."
Researchers said the protein on its own poses no apparent health or safety risk, and neither vaccine has caused significant side effects.
The aim of the Phase I trials was to verify safety of the two vaccines and get an initial idea whether they stimulate the immune system, particularly white blood cells called T cells that are responsible for killing bacteria and viruses.
The first vaccine was comprised of pure DNA that instructs for production of the HIV gag gene.
It was tested among 108 volunteers, divided into groups receiving either a 1 milligram or 5 milligram dose of the vaccine, or a placebo vaccine.
But the strongest immune responses were seen among dozens of volunteers given varying doses of a different Merck vaccine comprised of the gag gene crammed into an adenovirus, or common cold virus.
The cold virus -- modified beforehand
so it could not reproduce in the recipient -- was used as a vector, or delivery vehicle, for the gag gene.
"The adenovirus-vector vaccine has been by far the vaccine we are most excited about because it appeared the most promising in our earlier monkey studies," Dr. John Shiver, Merck's senior director of vaccine research, said in an interview.
Shiver said volunteers given the naked gag gene vaccine were injected four times within a 30-week period.
Only about 2 percent getting the 1 milligram dose showed a positive immune response 12 weeks into the trial, although about 20 percent had significant T-cell responses after 30 weeks.
Among those getting the 5 milligram dose of the naked DNA vaccine, up to 42 percent showed positive immune responses at 30 weeks, as judged by a laboratory test that measures how many T cells in a given blood sample are actively producing the antiviral chemical gamma-interferon.
"It appears the higher the dose of the DNA vaccine, the better the immune response," said Shiver, who noted that Merck licensed the naked DNA vaccine method from San Diego biotech firm Vical Inc.
But Shiver said results were more impressive for patients receiving the adenovirus vector vaccine.
Six of the nine volunteers getting the lowest dose of the vaccine, or 67 percent, showed T-cell responses after a series of inoculations given over both an eight-week period and a 30-week period.
About half the subjects receiving various doses of the adenovirus vector vaccine showed positive T-cell responses.
"That may be related to the fact that half of all North Americans have natural antibodies against the type of adenovirus our vaccine uses," Shiver said, meaning their immune systems were naturally inclined to attack the cold virus and could be neutralizing the vaccine in the process.
With monkeys, neither the naked DNA vaccine nor the adenovirus-vector vaccine was able to prevent infection with an HIV-like virus.
But combined use of the vaccines stimulated dramatic immune responses in monkeys who were later infected with the virus, enabling long-term suppression of the virus and AIDS-like symptoms.
For that reason, Shiver said most of the humans already given the naked DNA vaccine will now also be given Merck's adenovirus vector vaccine, to see if their immune responses can also be further stimulated.
He said results of volunteers taking both vaccines would be available at an unknown future date, after which Merck could proceed with larger and later-stage trials better geared to determine effectiveness of the vaccines.
"We hope to determine if our vaccines can either protect against infection with the virus or control the virus," Shiver said, noting that no vaccine yet exists to prevent HIV infection although many firms are racing to develop one.
In the meantime, Shiver said controlling the virus in already infected people might not only moderate or prevent AIDS symptoms, but could slash bloodstream HIV levels so greatly that patients will be unlikely to infect others.
An estimated 40 million people globally, most of them in Africa, are believed infected with HIV.
A vaccine to prevent infection is considered the only practical, and affordable, way of controlling the ever-widening epidemic.
Stocks moved into positive ground in mid-afternoon trading on Tuesday after the Federal Reserve cut the borrowing costs by a half percentage point in its tenth interest-rate reduction this year to lift the sluggish economy. 
The blue chip Dow Jones industrial average .DJI was up 5.47 points, or 0.06 percent, at 9,446.50.
The broader Standard & Poor's 500 Index .SPX added 0.18 of a point, or 0.02 percent, at 1,103.02.
The technology-laced Nasdaq Composite Index .IXIC rose 7.89 points, or 0.44 percent, to 1,801.54. 
The central bank cut rates by a half percentage point for the third time in less than two months after the Sept. 11 attacks leveled the World Trade Center and exacerbated the economy's woes.
The reduction brings the federal funds overnight lending rate to 2.0 percent, its lowest level in four decades. 
Investors widely expect the economy to slip into recession this year, but they are betting a rebound is in the cards by 2002.
Those hopes have supported stocks in the past few weeks amid a downpour of dismal economic data.
The economy suffered its worst contraction in more than a decade in the third quarter, and job losses hit a two-decade high last month. 
"A lot of people were only expecting 25 basis points.
We got the 50, so we got the market up," said Thomas Garcia, who helps manage $2.5 billion for Thornburg Asset Management.
"Rate cuts are good for the overall economy because the cheaper it is to borrow, the more you're willing to do it.
This expands the economy faster."
An astronaut wielding a 50-foot robotic arm snatched the Hubble Space Telescope from its orbit on Sunday, then secured it to the space shuttle Columbia for repairs that should make the orbiting observatory 10 times more powerful.
It was the high point of a day that began with good news from Mission Control for the astronauts, who learned that a mechanical problem on the shuttle would not scuttle their 11-day mission before they even reached Hubble.
Shuttle commander Scott Altman and pilot Duane Cary refined their orbit and slowed their speed so that they inched their way up to Hubble as both shuttle and observatory sped around the Earth at 5 miles per second.
The task of grappling Hubble with the robot arm fell to astronaut Nancy Currie, a U.S. Army helicopter pilot and an ace with the Canadian-built arm.
NASA has turned to her for two of its most important jobs.
On her last flight she joined the first two modules of the International Space Station.
Manipulating Hubble, the jewel in NASA's crown of science satellites, was considered equally significant.
"Houston, we have Hubble on our arm," Altman radioed Mission Control once Currie had grasped the four-story observatory.
gave Columbia's crew the green light to finish their mission on Saturday after studying a low-flow rate in a coolant loop that is critical for reentry through Earth's atmosphere.
Even though the flow of Freon through the loop was below the rate allowed by flight rules, NASA determined there was no leak and that the stable rate, though low, was sufficient.
Monday begins an aggressive schedule of five spacewalks in five days by alternating teams of astronauts who will install new, more powerful solar-power arrays -- the distinctive "wings" on either side of Hubble -- add a new power control unit, a new imaging camera and replace parts on an long-dormant infra-red camera.
has called these spacewalks some of the most challenging attempted by shuttle astronauts.
First up on Monday will be the spacewalking team of John Grunsfeld and Rick Linnehan who will replace one of the two solar arrays.
Grunsfeld is a Hubble veteran, having flown on the last service mission in 1999.
"It's great to see an old friend," he said after catching sight of the Hubble in orbit.
It is the third spacewalk, scheduled for Wednesday and again featuring Grunsfeld and Linnehan, that will be the proverbial nail-biter, because NASA will turn off Hubble's power, something that was never supposed to happen in orbit, then hope ground controllers can bring the 12-year-old satellite back to life.
While Hubble is dormant, the astronauts will try to replace a power control unit with dozens of snaking cables and power couplings that send electricity throughout the satellite.
The old power unit, which has operated for years at about two-thirds capacity, was designed as a permanent component and never meant to be worked on by astronauts.
"I don't think we're going to be really biting our fingernails," said Preston Burch, NASA's Hubble program manager.
"We're going to be attentive, we're going to be working real hard on the ground ... there won't be time for much fretting and worrying."
The new power unit and new solar arrays will mean enough power for all of Hubble's science instruments to operate at once, making multiple observations of a single target possible, NASA said.
The head of AOL's broadband unit, a key growth engine for AOL Time Warner Inc.
AOL.N that investors say has been unfocused, will take a "break" and has been replaced, a company spokesman said Friday.
The move comes at a time investors are growing increasingly impatient with AOL Time Warner, the world's largest Internet service provider, and are seeking more clarity in its high-speed access, or broadband, efforts.
Audrey Weil, a company veteran who has been head of the broadband unit since last summer, will leave in May, AOL spokesman Jim Whitney said.
"Audrey Weil is taking a break.
She's coming back at the end of the summer and will take on new responsibilities," he said.
Weil will be replaced by Lisa Hook, currently head of the company's AOL Anywhere efforts.
Hook has a telecoms background and was previously with Time Warner Telecom, Whitney said.
Kaufman Bros. analyst Paul Kim said the change in command at the broadband unit came none too soon, as "no one knows what their broadband strategy is.
"There's a lot of confusion.
They need more direction.
Maybe they need new blood, but (their strategy) definitely needs to be clarified."
Insiders said the bulk of the power to get AOL Time Warner's growth recharged through broadband lied at the higher ranks of management, rather than just with Weil.
After losing in its bid for No. 1 cable operator AT&T Broadband to Comcast Corp.
CMCSK.O , Wall Street has been waiting for the Internet and media giant to make its next move -- whether through an acquisition of a cable operator or a series of pacts to get its AOL Internet service distributed on other cable pipelines.
The company has made it known that it is focused on getting access to cable -- one way or another -- but investors want to know how and at what cost and when.
The urgency for clarification has grown as AOL's dial-up business is slowing.
"You would like to see a strategy that is a little more clear.
A strategy that had garnered more broadband subscribers on AOL and more communication from management on what an AOL broadband subscriber means in regards to profitability," said Paul Cook, a portfolio manager at Munder Net Net Fund, and owner of AOL shares.
The Internet has lost its novelty for many U.S. users but is turning into an increasingly important tool for everyday living, according to a study released on Sunday.
As Internet users gain more online experience, they reported a slight dip in the length of the average online session -- from 90 minutes to 83 minutes over the course of one year, the Pew Internet and American Life Project found.
But experienced users said they were more likely to use that time for activities like working from home, checking bank-account balances and making travel reservations, rather than simply browsing.
E-mail has lost its novelty as well, the survey found, as users said they sent messages to distant friends and relatives less frequently.
But users are more likely to rely on the medium to express worries, ask for advice or send other serious messages.
"The Internet has gone from novelty to utility for many Americans," said Lee Rainie, director of the Pew project.
"They are beginning to take it for granted, but they can't imagine life without it."
Many experienced users said the Internet modified their "offline" behavior as well.
One out of four said they spend less time watching television, while nearly one in three who shop online said they have spent less time shopping in "bricks and mortar" stores as a result.
Internet users were more likely to bring their work home with them, the study found.
Fourteen percent of those surveyed said the computer network increased the amount of time spent working from home, while 5 percent said their work at home had decreased.
The survey did not find a dramatic increase in telecommuting, as only 6 percent said they spent less time in traffic because of their Internet use.
That figure jumped to 30 percent for those who said they worked more from home.
Unwanted junk e-mail, or "spam," led the list of complaints, with 44 percent saying it was a problem.
More than half said they had received an e-mail with pornographic content.
The Pew Internet & American Life Project tracked 1,501 Internet users over the course of a year, from March 2000 to March 2001.
The survey has a margin of error of plus or minus 4 percent.
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld flew on Saturday to Uzbekistan, a key Central Asian ally in the military campaign in Afghanistan, as part of a lightning tour that had already taken in Russia and Tajikistan. 
He made no comment on arrival late at night in Tashkent from Tajikistan which, like Uzbekistan, has strategic significance for the United States since it borders Afghanistan.
Russia had earlier renewed a promise of intelligence support for the war. 
After meeting Tajik President Imomali Rakhmonov in Dushanbe, Rumsfeld expressed gratitude for the former Soviet republic's cooperation with U.S. "overflights and intelligence and various types of military-to-military cooperation." 
He told journalists that experts from both sides would study what additional help could be provided in the war against the Islamic Taliban movement that rules Afghanistan. 
Tajikistan has offered the use of its airspace and other support for U.S. search-and-rescue and humanitarian operations. 
Fellow former Soviet republic Uzbekistan has offered an air base to Washington for similar operations and at least 1,000 U.S. troops are thought to be based there. 
Rumsfeld was due to have talks with Uzbek President Islam Karimov before flying on to Pakistan and finally to India, the last stop on the whirlwind tour of five countries. 
Earlier in Moscow, Rumsfeld had talks in the Kremlin on Russia's key backing for the month-long campaign, including support by Russia's intelligence services. 
"Today we discussed the specific levels of our cooperation," Russian Defense Minister Sergei Ivanov told reporters after attending a meeting with Rumsfeld and President Vladimir Putin. 
"To a large part it concerns Russia's use of special services and here I cannot comment any further," said Ivanov, who also had separate talks with his U.S. counterpart. 
Russia, while backing Washington's anti-terrorism campaign, has ruled out any involvement of its armed forces.
It was clear that by "special services" Ivanov was referring to intelligence agents and not special operations commandos. 
Russia has sided with the United States in efforts to form a global anti-terrorism coalition.
It has backed the U.S. campaign aimed at toppling the Taliban, which is sheltering Osama bin Laden, who is blamed by Washington for the September 11 attacks on the United States. 
Supplying intelligence to the United States on militants and Afghanistan was part of a public pledge made by Putin in September when he outlined Russian policy on the crisis. 
But Ivanov, mindful of the Russian public and the trauma of Moscow's 10-year armed intervention in Afghanistan which cost thousands of Russian lives in the 1980s, once again emphasized that Russian troops would not be sent to Afghanistan. 
"I see no reason why we should change our position," he said. 
With a U.S. summit meeting scheduled in 10 days between Putin and President Bush, the two defense chiefs also had some discussion on strategic arms, one of the main sticking points marring a relationship that is otherwise enjoying a period of unusual warmth.
(Additional reporting by Sergei Yakovlev and Adam Tanner in Dushanbe and Oleg Shchedrov in Moscow)
Top Bush administration officials hit Sunday talk shows to reject criticism of the government's response to deadly anthrax attacks at home and errant bombings in Afghanistan. 
Officials said the U.S.-led military response against Afghanistan's ruling Taliban and the al Qaeda network it harbors was proceeding as expected, with air strikes already having some success in disrupting the Taliban's activities. 
Seeking to downplay a quick U.S. victory in Afghanistan, the officials said the military campaign could take months even years.
But they insisted the U.S. government had the resolve and patience to win the war. 
White House chief of staff Andrew Card and others rejected criticism of the government's handling of security measures after mail was tainted with anthrax, saying the government responded as quickly as it could to protect postal workers. 
Two Washington mail handlers died last week, angering some postal officials who accused the government of acting too slow to protect workers who handled a letter to Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle, while U.S. lawmakers and their staff were immediately tested for the deadly bacteria. 
"We have a brand new threat to this country that almost no one could have anticipated -- anthrax showing up in the mail -- and we are working very hard with very little evidence," Card told NBC's "Meet the Press" on Sunday. 
Authorities waited nearly a week to start testing postal workers at the Brentwood facility in Washington, which processes mail for the U.S. Capitol and other areas. 
"The early days of any battle introduce what's called the fog of war and we're still looking through that fog to find the truth," he said. 
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld told ABC's "This Week" that the government was now doing everything possible to protect U.S. citizens against further exposure to anthrax, which was developed as a germ warfare agent by the former Soviet Union, the United States and other states such as Iraq. 
In addition to the anthrax outbreak, the administration this week faced setbacks on the front lines of the war in Afghanistan, including the bombing of a Red Cross complex in Kabul and the execution of a top opposition leader. 
Rumsfeld acknowledged there were setbacks, but said the military campaign was "going very much as expected.
" 
"It's not a quagmire at all, it's been three weeks that we've been engaged in this," Rumsfeld told reporters. 
He acknowledged that U.S. planes inadvertently bombed the Red Cross warehouse and a residential area nearby, but accused the Taliban of manipulating the news. 
"When there's a bomb that goes down, they grab some women and children and pretend the bomb hit the women and children," he told reporters. 
The bombing of the Red Cross warehouse was the second time since the U.S.-led bombing of Afghanistan began on Oct. 7. 
Washington's efforts have also been set back by the execution of Abdul Haq, a top Afghan opposition commander, caught by the Taliban last week in Afghanistan. 
Card said Haq had been working with U.S. forces, but denied he was on a specific Central Intelligence Agency mission. 
"It is unfortunate that he did become a victim of this war.
He was a strong leader and we had hopes that he would be part of a leadership effort in post-Taliban Afghanistan," he said. 
Card said the U.S. government had responded well to the Sept. 11 attacks. 
"We've got a president who is clearly in charge," Card said as Bush huddled with his national security team at Camp David, the presidential retreat, plotting the United States' next move in Afghanistan.
Cubans dashed to food shops and battened down their homes on Saturday as Hurricane Michelle, which could be the worst storm to hit them in half a century, gained strength south of the Caribbean's largest island. 
Having already killed at least 10, left 26 missing and made thousands homeless in Central America, Michelle intensified dramatically overnight and was packing winds of up to 135 mph (215 kph) as it crept north toward Cuba early in the afternoon. 
"It's an imminent threat.
It's the most dangerous one we have had in the last 50 years," said the Cuban Weather Institute's chief meteorologist, Jose Rubiera, predicting the storm would be upon western Cuba by Sunday. 
State TV, totally given over to hurricane preparations, displayed images from a 1932 hurricane that flattened the unprepared northern coastal town of Santa Cruz del Norte, killing more than 3,000 people. 
Having turned into a Category Four hurricane in the morning, Michelle is now capable of inflicting heavy damage when it likely crosses near western Cuba.
But authorities were confident several days of preparations and the evacuation of 160,000 people would minimize damage and prevent loss of life. 
"It's not very nice to be visited by a cyclone now," President Fidel Castro said in a TV address late on Friday. "
But no one's in a panic ... .
We're calm, serene and secure." 
In Havana, home to 2 million of Cuba's 11 million inhabitants, residents formed large lines to buy food, cleaned debris off the streets and taped up their windows.
Many were evacuated out of the deteriorated coastal capital's danger-zones near the sea and in Old Havana. 
"I've sent my son out to buy some candles
and I'm stocking up on drinking water.
Let's see what happens," a 68-year-old housewife, Virgen Rodriguez, said in a line outside a supermarket in the Vedado district of Havana. 
"Everyone's out getting basic foods, soda drinks, biscuits, eggs, pasta," added another shopper, Miriam. 
All of Cuba's western and central provinces were on hurricane watch as the fringes of Michelle began to whip up 13-foot waves off the southern coast and send heavy rains and winds across the island. 
Hundreds of thousands of people, mainly in low-lying coastal areas, were being evacuated, as Cuba's grass-roots organizations -- all affiliated with the ruling Communist Party -- mobilized the nation in a military-like operation. 
Work crews secured cables, lamp posts and drains, as Cuba's neighborhood groups, the Committees for the Defense of the Revolution (CDRs), organized the collection of rubbish and loose materials on the streets. 
Authorities began moving hundreds of tourists and tourism workers off beach resorts.
Some incoming flights from Mexico and Canada were suspended, as well as domestic flights to southern islands. 
At 1 p.m. EST Michelle's center was about 175 miles south-southeast of Cuba's western tip at latitude 19.4 north and longitude 84.2 west, according to the U.S. National Hurricane Center in Miami. 
Cuba's Weather Institute said it was moving north at about 4 mph and would likely first affect an exposed island off Cuba's south coast, the Isle of Youth, which some say was the inspiration for Robert Louis Stevenson's "Treasure Island." 
EN ROUTE FOR FLORIDA? 
The hurricane was expected to veer northeast after passing Cuba, but it was too early to say if it would slip by just south of Florida or roll right over it, said Max Mayfield, director of the National Hurricane Center in Miami. 
Trisha Wallace, a National Hurricane Center forecaster, called Michelle the most intense storm of this hurricane season.
"It could be a dangerous storm, even if it grazes you," she said. 
Authorities declared a state of emergency in Florida early on Saturday.
Tourists and residents of mobile homes and low-lying areas were being evacuated from the Florida Keys. 
A powerboat race scheduled for this weekend, which was set to bring throngs of visitors to the Keys, was canceled. 
In Miami-Dade and Broward counties in south Florida, already flooded parts of low-lying neighborhoods were being drained in anticipation of heavy rainfall.
Fierce wind and heavy surf have been eroding the beaches for days, bringing the sea to the doorsteps of beach-side businesses and residences. 
Before developing into a hurricane, Michelle swamped Jamaica with torrential rains and left at least 10 dead in Central America.
"Monsters, Inc.," the latest family cartoon from Walt Disney Co. and Pixar Animation Studios Inc., scored a monstrous opening, scaring up $63.5 million in ticket sales in its first three days, according to studio estimates issued on Sunday. 
The tally, derived from 3,237 theaters across the United States and Canada since the film's Friday opening, ranked as the best cartoon opening of all time and as a company record for Disney, officials at the studio said. 
"Monsters, Inc." revolves around a civilization of colorful critters whose power supply is fueled by the screams of human children visited in the night by a "Top Gun"-like squadron of scaremeisters who bottle the squeals.
The voice cast includes John Goodman, Billy Crystal, Steve Buscemi and Jennifer Tilly. 
It easily ranked as the No. 1 film this weekend, trailed by the Jet Li martial arts film "The One" (Columbia), which opened with about $20 million. "
Domestic Disturbance" (Paramount), a thriller starring John Travolta, debuted at No. 3 with $14.5 million.
Last weekend's No. 1, "K-Pax" (Universal), a drama starring Kevin Spacey and Jeff Bridges, slipped to No. 4 with $10.7 million. 
Columbia Pictures is a unit of Sony Corp. .
Paramount Pictures is a unit of Viacom Inc. , while Universal Pictures is a unit of Vivendi Universal . 
The overall box office soared to its highest level in 12 weeks.
The top 12 films grossed about $137 million, up 89 percent from last weekend and up 44 percent from the year-ago period, when "Charlie's Angels" opened at No. 1 with $40 million.
The last time receipts were this high was Aug. 12 to 14, when "American Pie 2" helped power the top 12 to a $148 million weekend. 
"Monsters, Inc." surpassed the $59 million three-day bow of Disney's live-action "Pearl Harbor" in May, as well as the $57 million launch of Disney/Pixar's previous effort, "Toy Story 2," in November 1999.
In addition to the two "Toy Story" features, Disney teamed with Emeryville, California-based Pixar for 1998's "A Bug's Life."
"Monsters, Inc." was directed by Pete Docter, a protege of "Toy Story" creator John Lasseter. 
"Monsters, Inc." ranked as the biggest November opening ever, the fourth-best opening of 2001 and the fifth-highest non-holiday opener, Disney said. 
"I think we always knew we had a great story, but to think we could launch a holiday movie at this level is great," said Chuck Viane, Disney's president of distribution. 
In the sweet revenge category, "Monsters, Inc." surpassed the $42.2 million wide opening of "Shrek," also released last May, by the studio's animation archrival, DreamWorks SKG. "
Shrek" is the biggest release in North America so far this year, with about $267 million in ticket sales. 
"The One" ranks as the biggest opener for a film headlined by its star, Chinese-born actor Jet Li.
His previous record was $18 million for last year's "Romeo Must Die."
The new film's audience was expanded by its PG-13 rating, whereas Li's previous films were R-rated. 
A Paramount spokeswoman said that "Domestic Disturbance" opened within expectations, although sales were hurt by competition for parents from "Monsters, Inc." "K-Pax" has grossed $32.1 million after 10 days in release.
Rounding out the top five was the frightfest "Thirteen Ghosts," which fell three places to No. 5 with $8.0 million, also in its second weekend.
The film has grossed $27.8 million for Warner Bros., a unit of AOL Time Warner Inc. . 
In the limited release arena, French romantic comedy hit "Amelie" opened in the United States, playing in two theaters in New York and one in Los Angeles.
Writer-director Jean-Pierre Jeunet's whimsical portrait of a waitress (Audrey Tautou), grossed a magnifique $140,000 from those three theaters.
It will expand to 250 screens by Nov. 16, said a spokesman for Disney-owned Miramax. 
France has submitted "Amelie" as its contender for the foreign-language Oscar, and industry observers expect Miramax to campaign hard for other hardware.
Lawyers for Microsoft Corp. and the U.S. Justice Department told a federal judge on Wednesday their proposed antitrust settlement was better than what could be achieved by further litigation and urged its quick approval.
But U.S. District Judge Colleen Kollar-Kotelly said she still had a lot to consider and offered no indication she would endorse the settlement ahead of hearings on a proposal for harsher sanctions from nine states that have refused to sign the pact.
"This is a very important and complex case to which I am going to give careful and thoughtful attention," Kollar-Kotelly said at the end of the day-long hearing.
Microsoft and the federal government, former adversaries in the nearly four-year-old case, sought to persuade Kollar-Kotelly that their settlement is the best deal for consumers and companies trying to compete with Microsoft.
The settlement terms "go beyond those that we would likely have obtained had we litigated," Justice Department attorney Philip Beck said.
He urged Kollar-Kotelly to quickly approve the settlement.
Waiting until the end of the separate hearings on the non-settling states' demands would be a prescription for "potentially inordinate delays," Beck said.
Microsoft lawyer John Warden said the company was confident it could have limited the scope of sanctions if the lawsuit were to go forward, but settled "to achieve certainty about the rules going forward."
Kollar-Kotelly did not give any indication of whether she is inclined to accept, reject or modify the settlement.
She said she would consider that decision separately from hearings on any further remedies.
She also pressed Microsoft to say if it agreed with the Justice Department's interpretation of the settlement, perhaps anticipating a dispute like that which erupted over a 1995 agreement and led ultimately to the present case.
Warden, after conferring with other Microsoft lawyers present in the court, said, "We have a meeting of the minds, that we certainly agree with the scope and operation of the (settlement).
"
Under the settlement proposal reached in November, computer makers would get more freedom to feature rival software on the machines they sell.
It also would require Microsoft to share some of the inner workings of its Windows operating system with rival software makers.
Nine of the 18 states in the lawsuit agreed to sign on to the settlement.
But another nine -- California, Connecticut, Florida, Iowa, Kansas, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Utah and West Virginia -- still are pursuing the case, saying the settlement is too weak to prevent future antitrust violations.
Kollar-Kotelly's endorsement of the settlement is required under a 1974 federal law called the Tunney Act that governs federal antitrust settlements.
Separate hearings on the calls for harsher remedies are due to start next Monday and could last two months.
Microsoft has asked for a two-week delay to study some refinements of the dissenting states' demands that include selling a version of Windows that can be stripped of features like the Web browser.
Microsoft and the Justice Department have pushed for Kollar-Kotelly to endorse the settlement separately, before starting proceedings on any further remedies.
In that case, the nine states that oppose the deal could have a tougher time arguing for additional sanctions against the company.
Beck told the judge the appeals court ruling was not broad enough to allow the government to impose stricter remedies against Microsoft, as some of Microsoft's competitors and consumer groups have urged.
Specifically, Beck said the Justice Department could not have demanded any sanctions designed to take away Microsoft's Windows monopoly unless it could prove that competitors, like Netscape with its Web browser, would have succeeded but for Microsoft's behavior.
"If we had not settled we would have tried," Beck said.
But it "would have been an uphill battle that likely would have been resolved against us."
But Kollar-Kotelly balked at that argument, saying the appeals court had set that mainly as the standard for breaking up the company.
The appeals court in June ruled against breaking up the software giant.
The judge also wondered if the settlement's definition of "middleware" was broad enough and wanted more details of a three-member panel that would oversee the settlement.
Middleware software, such as an Internet browser, sits between the computer users and the operating system and could be a threat to Microsoft's Windows.
"I do want to know whether you are taking a different approach (from the appeals court) and if (so), I want to know why," Kollar-Kotelly said.
Judges typically give deference to the Justice Department in antitrust settlements but the Microsoft settlement confronts Kollar-Kotelly with an unprecedented situation, according to legal experts.
That's because the courts have already ruled against Microsoft.
All previous settlements under the Tunney Act, in contrast, have involved cases that never got to trial or a verdict.
A lawyer representing SBC Communications Inc. told the judge that the Justice Department's standard would allow any monopolist to kill off emerging competitors "in the crib" with impunity.
's lawyer, Donald Flexner, also questioned whether Microsoft will use its dominant Internet Explorer browser to take over the market for Internet servers and, eventually, the market for Internet services such as e-commerce.
Beck said the settlement would bar Microsoft from doing that by requiring the company to disclose some of the inner workings of the browser and how it inter-operates with servers.
Democratic venture capitalist Mark Warner was elected governor of Virginia on Tuesday, beating Republican former Attorney General Mark Earley in a race overshadowed by the Sept. 11 attacks. 
Warner, who billed himself as a fiscal conservative while spending a state record $18 million on his campaign, was leading by 52 percent to 47 percent, with 99 percent of precincts reporting, according to unofficial results. 
"You know, this campaign has been the longest job interview of my life.
But now the people of Virginia have spoken.
They said they want a new approach for our commonwealth, and tonight I'm here to tell you
I'm ready for the challenge," he said. 
Warner, 46, who amassed a $200 million fortune in the cellular communications boom, will succeed Gov. Jim Gilmore, who was prohibited by term limits from seeking re-election.
Gilmore's pledge to eliminate a state car tax led to a Republican sweep of the state's top elected offices in 1997. 
As chairman of the Republican National Committee, Gilmore was credited with helping Earley raise about a third of his $10 million war chest.
But sparring between Gilmore and Republican legislators over cutting the car tax in the face of projected budget deficits gave Warner an opening early in the race. 
"I think the budget impasse really provided a rationale for (Warner's) candidacy," said Robert Holsworth, a political scientist at Virginia Commonwealth University.
"Warner said his experience as business person was the most appropriate way of rectifying the situation, and I think ultimately people believed him." 
Earley, 47, trailed in polls throughout the race and had difficulty energizing his conservative base in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks that leveled a section of the Pentagon in northern Virginia and the World Trade Center's twin towers, pollsters said. 
President Bush endorsed Earley in a letter to Virginia voters and a taped telephone message but did not stump for the Republican during the campaign.
Earley also picked up an endorsement in the final week from New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani. 
"We have never retreated from the message of individual liberties, low taxes, limited government and world-class education," Earley said in a concession speech in Richmond. "
That record, the record of (Republican governors)
George Allen and Jim Gilmore, was a record on which I was proud to run and a record which history will record as a golden era." 
Warner's support of a proposed referendum to allow voters in traffic-clogged northern Virginia to decide whether to increase taxes to fund $900 million of his $2.3 billion transportation plan resonated in his home base. 
"He really appealed to the frustration that northern Virginians had with the direction of the state in the sense that northern Virginia's needs were not being attended to by Richmond," Holsworth said.
A Senate office building contaminated in several areas by anthrax mailed to Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle may remain closed until mid-November after it is fumigated with a chlorine-based gas, U.S. officials said on Monday. 
The Environmental Protection Agency plans to use chlorine dioxide gas to decontaminate the Hart office building, which was closed on Oct. 17, after a letter containing anthrax spores was opened in Daschle's office two days earlier. 
Twenty-eight people, most of them staffers to the South Dakota Democrat, tested positive for exposure to the potentially deadly spores.
They have been treated with antibiotics and none has become ill. 
EPA officials and Assistant Senate Majority leader Harry Reid said at a briefing for reporters the fumigation procedure will take 16 days.
If it goes according to schedule, the building would be reopened on Nov. 13. 
The plan to use the type of gas not used on anthrax before was to be reviewed by experts in the EPA and other agencies a final time later on Monday and on Tuesday, the officials said.
The gas has successfully destroyed other bacteria considered tougher than the anthrax strain, they said. 
EPA officials assured senators that the plan was "the quickest, most protective and least disruptive approach we can take," said Reid, a Nevada Democrat. 
He also said lawmakers were told it was the only way to safeguard papers, art work and other valuable artifacts in their offices. 
EPA officials said they would seal off the office building, which is joined by a basement hallway system to other Senate buildings and the Capitol. 
They said the gas breaks down quickly, and they have a set of procedures to verify the destruction of the anthrax spores. 
After an earlier closed briefing with EPA officials, Sen. Larry Craig, an Idaho Republican, said full fumigation of the building was needed because there was contamination on several floors and on an air vent. 
Foams and other types of applications that could have been used more quickly on surfaces and without fully closing the building could not be used "without risking the spores to go airborne," Craig said. 
Since the building was closed, many senators have had to set up makeshift offices, with their staffs scattered in spare rooms in other buildings. 
"You've got 50 senators, myself among them, working in nooks and crannies of the Capitol," said Sen. Byron Dorgan, a North Dakota Democrat.
But he said it was worth it to ensure that the building is safe. 
"What every senator wants is the building to be safe for their staff," Craig said. 
Asked about the cost of the fumigation, Reid said, that was not considered.
"It will cost whatever it takes to make the building safe," he said. 
In addition to the area around Daschle's office on the fifth and sixth floors of the Hart Building, spores have been found in an air conditioning filter on the ninth floor, at the stairwell leading from the eighth to the ninth floor, and at a first floor elevator bank, officials have said. 
Small amounts of anthrax also have been found in three other Capitol Hill office buildings.
Sun Microsystems Inc. SUNW.O said on Friday it might sue rival Microsoft Corp MSFT.O , since it believed an anti-trust settlement between the federal government and the software maker would not protect competitors. 
Sun's top lawyer, General Counsel Mike Morris, told Reuters Microsoft would still be able to hurt competitors under a deal struck with the U.S. Department of Justice. 
"It is not even weak.
It is totally ineffectual," Morris said of the settlement.
"There are all sorts of outs and loopholes and vagaries and lack of definitions here." 
The deal, which must be endorsed by a federal judge, intends to curb Microsoft's powers by setting restrictions on how it treats competitors, and it avoids the breakup a court once recommended. 
Microsoft has stopped short of admitting it broke the law but said on Friday the deal gave it new responsibilities. 
Morris said Sun would now consider a civil suit against Microsoft.
"I can't tell you what we will do, but I can assure you that we will now move to active consideration and decision about what to do," he said. 
Sun had been waiting to see if the courts would check Microsoft, Morris said.
"We wanted to see how all this panned out, but now we know." 
Lawyers have said Sun was given ammunition for a potentially major civil anti-trust lawsuit by a U.S. Court of Appeals which ruled in June that Microsoft held a monopoly and violated anti-trust laws in its efforts to suppress Sun's Java programming language. 
Sun's Internet-friendly Java programming language has been embraced by corporations and developers in part because it runs on different operating systems, which is a boon for developers trying that otherwise might have to adapt each program to many environments. 
The court found in June that Microsoft tried to stop Java and used its power to push a "polluted" version of Java that would not run only on Windows. 
"Microsoft's conduct related to its Java developer tools served to protect its monopoly of the operating system in a manner not attributable either to the superiority of the operating system or to the acumen of its makers, and therefore was anti-competitive," the court wrote. 
"We've never been about hurting Microsoft," Morris said. 
"The principle duty of our board and management is to look after the interests of our shareholders, and it is with that in mind, and that in mind alone, that we will evaluate whether or not it makes sense to proceed with a civil suit," he said. 
Such a suit would tax Sun resources and potentially distract executives as they struggle to deal with an uncertain economy. 
However, Morris said the company knew the ropes of clashing with Microsoft. 
"We're used to it.
We've sued them before," he said.
Zimbabwe's opposition Sunday took court action to extend the country's election into a third day because of long delays, but President Robert Mugabe's government rejected the idea.
Justice Minister Patrick Chinamasa, who Saturday left the door open to extending the election, told state radio after observing voting queues in Harare from a plane that there were no legal grounds for a third day.
Information Minister Jonathan Moyo had earlier taken a similar line.
The opposition MDC of Morgan Tsvangirai, saying the delays are a tactic by Mugabe to disenfranchise its voters in Harare, petitioned the high court for an extension.
The court was due to give its decision later.
Earlier, Zimbabwe's main election organizer said the backlog of frustrated voters would be cleared by extending Sunday voting hours after the official close at 7 p.m. (1700 GMT).
"This is what happened yesterday and this is exactly what we will be doing tonight.
If there are queues we shall make sure those queues are dealt with and we shall not close at seven o'clock," Registrar-General Tobaiwa Mudede said on ZTV state television.
Authorities did the same Saturday night after the first day of voting in the capital -- an opposition stronghold -- was marred in many areas by huge delays for tens of thousands of voters.
Announcing the opposition legal case, MDC spokesman Percy Makombe said: "We are trying to compel the registrar-general to extend the polling days because it will be impossible to finish today."
International election observers had warned before the vote that it would be impossible to process in two days the 5,000 to 7,000 voters registered at many urban polling stations.
The average in rural areas was far lower and down to 700 per station in many villages, observers said.
State radio, quoting official figures, said only 127,000 people in the Harare area voted on the first day of the election out of 800,000 registered voters, almost all of them opposition supporters.
"The majority of our voters are deliberately being blocked out of this election," MDC information secretary Learnmore Jongwe said.
The United States will release evidence linking Saudi-born militant Osama bin Laden to the attacks on New York and Washington, Secretary of State Colin Powell said on Sunday. 
"We are hard at work bringing all the information together -- intelligence information, law enforcement information," he told the NBC program "Meet the Press." 
"I think in the near future, we will be able to put out a paper, a document, that will describe quite clearly the evidence that we have linking him to this attack," he said. 
Other U.S. officials have been evasive on whether the United States would release detailed evidence against bin Laden, as many Muslim governments have requested. 
National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice, asked the same question on "Fox News Sunday," said: "The United States is going to do nothing that jeopardizes the investigation that is ongoing here.
We are drawing in investigative services, law enforcement, intelligence from a lot of countries, and so we need to be careful with how we use this information." 
Asked if she meant the United States intended to keep any evidence secret to protect its sources and methods, she said: "Of course we're going to be laying out a case and making a case.
We're going to be making a case to allies and friends, many of whom, by the way, are already involved in developing that case.
We will be making a case to the American people." 
Reversing the policy of his predecessor who supported Oregon's first-in-the-nation assisted-suicide law, Attorney General John Ashcroft said on Tuesday doctors may not dispense drugs to help terminally ill patients die. 
Overturning the policy adopted by Attorney General Janet Reno in 1998, Ashcroft sided with the Drug Enforcement Administration, which had long argued that doctors who prescribe drugs under Oregon's assisted-suicide law could lose their licenses to write prescriptions. 
Reno had rejected the DEA position, but Ashcroft said the DEA had been correct. 
"I have concluded that the DEA's original reading of the (law) -- that controlled substances may not be dispensed to assist suicide -- was correct," Ashcroft said in a memo to Asa Hutchinson, the DEA administrator. 
Oregon Gov. John Kitzhaber denounced the decision as an "unprecedented federal intrusion on Oregon's ability to regulate the practice of medicine." 
Oregon's attorney general vowed to challenge Ashcroft's decision in federal court on Wednesday by filing motions to block federal agents from taking action against doctors who help patients die under the state law. 
"One action seeks to overturn the Ashcroft opinion.
The other seeks a temporary restraining order that would allow Oregon doctors to continue" to act under the state law, said Kevin Neely, a spokesman for state Attorney General Hardy Myers. 
"This is a complete reversal of what Reno said," Neely added.
"But we are confident we will win the reversal." 
Kitzhaber, a Democrat and a former doctor, said the Ashcroft decision would "deprive terminally ill Oregonians of a crucially important choice in how they manage their final days.
Oregonians are satisfied we can responsibly implement physician aid in dying." 
Kitzhaber also said Ashcroft's action would have a "chilling effect" on the willingness of doctors to treat pain aggressively. 
Ashcroft said controlled substances may be used to manage pain. 
"Pain management, rather than assisted suicide, has long been recognized as a legitimate medical purpose justifying physicians' dispensing of controlled substances," he said. 
"There are important medical, ethical and legal distinctions between intentionally causing a patient's death and providing sufficient dosages of pain medication necessary to eliminate or alleviate pain," Ashcroft said. 
While physicians are licensed by the states to practice medicine, the DEA registers doctors to prescribe drugs and the agency is responsible for enforcing the federal controlled substances law. 
Ashcroft based his decision on a Supreme Court ruling on May 14 that there was no exception in the federal drug law for the medical use of marijuana and that federal law may not be overridden by the legislative decisions of individual states. 
"I hereby determine that assisting suicide is not a 'legitimate medical purpose' within the meaning of (the law) and that prescribing, dispensing or administering federally controlled substances to assist suicide violates" federal law, Ashcroft said. 
The American Medical Association said, "Today's action makes a strong statement against physician-assisted suicide without hampering a physician's ability to aggressively relieve patient pain." 
Ashcroft said there was no change in DEA policy in states other than Oregon. 
The Oregon law specifies that physicians may use medications, but not lethal injections, to help a terminally ill patient commit suicide.
Two doctors must agree that the patient has no more than six months to live and is mentally competent.
An experimental drug that works to calm brain activity could help patients with moderate to severe Alzheimer's disease just as they lose the ability to care for themselves, researchers said on Tuesday.
The drug, called Memantine, slows over-excited brain cell signaling that is associated not only with Alzheimer's but with other brain diseases, including Parkinson's.
In doing so, it slows the progression of the disease, which gradually robs patients of their ability to remember, to find their way around, and to bathe and dress themselves, researchers told a meeting of the American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry in Orlando, Florida.
There is no cure for Alzheimer's, which affects 4 million Americans, and drugs used to treat it, such as Aricept, only slow progression of early disease.
The disease is always fatal and patients die robbed of most of their senses.
The Alzheimer's Association predicts that by 2050 more than 14 million people in the United States alone will develop Alzheimer's disease.
"(Memantine) is the first efficacious treatment for moderate to severe Alzheimer's, which is a big chunk of the disease," Dr. Barry Reisberg, a psychiatrist and Alzheimer's specialist at New York University School of Medicine who led the study, said in a telephone interview.
This stage of Alzheimer's lasts about 2 1/2 years.
"It is the stage of the disease when family members are the most burdened," Reisberg said.
"Over the course of this stage of Alzheimer's disease, patients progressively lose the ability to pick out their clothes and to put on their clothes, to bathe without assistance ... and become incontinent."
"They usually can't give you their correct address and usually can't give you the name of the president.
They still know their own name," he added.
Reisberg's team tested Memantine on 252 patients at this stage of the disease.
Half got the drug and half got a placebo.
Researchers, who did know which patients got the drug, watched and recorded their progress.
"The Memantine was very, very well-tolerated," Reisberg said.
"There was a marked slowing of the functional problems of the patient.
Cognitively we saw something very similar."
Depending on the test used, the drug either slowed deterioration entirely for six months, or cut the rate in half.
The drug is an NMDA antagonist.
It blocks the transmission of NMDA, one of the brain's messenger chemicals that becomes overactive in diseases such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's.
The next step is to see how long the slowing lasts, and then to test the drug in earlier- and later-stage Alzheimer's patients.
Forest Laboratories, Inc. is applying for U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval of the drug this year.
Danish pharmaceuticals group Lundbeck, which holds some rights to the drug in Europe, Canada, Australia and South Africa, said last week the drug was recommended for approval by a European Union committee.
Evidence-based interventions for HIV prevention in developing countries--Comparison of efficiency, effect size, and cost-effectiveness.
DALY, disability-adjusted life-year. 
The third criterion is cost-effectiveness.
As many intervention effects accrue over time, mathematical models are important for assessing and comparing the long-term cost-effectiveness of particular measures.
The intervention ratio, effect size, and cost-effectiveness of various interventions are summarized in the table (above).
Peer-mediated education programs among female sex workers are among the first interventions to be described and are perhaps the ones with the highest impact in preventing HIV infection in developing countries.
In areas with high HIV prevalence, female sex workers rapidly acquire HIV and infect their male clients, who then infect other female sex partners, who then infect their children.
The central importance of unprotected sex within core groups is perhaps best illustrated by the observation that major HIV heterosexual epidemics only occur in societies where this practice is common.
Peer-mediated prevention programs have consistently achieved sustained high-level condom use, and reduced the risk of acquiring HIV and sexually transmitted infections (STIs), thereby preventing further transmission .
Thailand acted successfully upon this insight and India has adopted this approach in its national AIDS control strategy.
Contrary to some beliefs, peer-mediated education programs generally reduce the stigmatization associated with the sex trade, spark community development, do not promote sex work, and also contribute to the control of other STIs.
High-risk male behavior, notably unprotected sex with female sex workers, is also central to HIV transmission.
Although high-risk men are not as readily identified as high-risk women, they may be amenable to intervention through their workplaces .
However, there are many more clients than there are female sex workers, and they have far fewer sex partners, reducing the intervention efficiency ratio.
Conventional STIs act as cofactors in HIV transmission by increasing HIV susceptibility and infectivity.
These considerations prompted the randomized community trial in Mwanza, Tanzania, which showed that improved and expanded STI treatment reduced HIV incidence by about 40% .
Another community intervention trial in Rakai, Uganda, based on periodic mass antibiotic treatment for STIs, did not reduce HIV incidence.
Although there has been debate about the interpretation, the Mwanza study clearly showed that improved case management of largely symptomatic STIs is cost-effective .
Furthermore, STIs are risk markers as well as true risk factors, making STI patients an ideal group for behavioral interventions.
Mother-to-child transmission rates among untreated, breastfeeding HIV-infected mothers range from 25 to 48%; about half of transmission is due to breastfeeding, with the rest occurring before or at birth .
Consequently, about 470,000 children worldwide die of AIDS annually.
Clinical trials have shown that many mother-to-child transmission infections are preventable.
For example, in a randomized trial in Kenya, breast milk substitutes prevented 44% of cases of mother-to-child transmission .
Short courses of antiretroviral drugs such as zidovudine or nevirapine for mothers and newborns have reduced transmission by 37 to 50% in low-income country settings, and such interventions are cost-effective, with costs below $100 per healthy life year gained .
About six infected breastfeeding women would need to be given breast milk substitutes, or eight treated with nevirapine, to avert one infant infection; however, the number of women requiring screening to prevent an infection is large, and depends on HIV prevalence.
In low-prevalence settings, the number of infections prevented by these interventions is small.
To reduce costs in high-prevalence countries , antiretroviral therapy could be offered to all pregnant women, with or without screening, but the health systems in many developing countries may be unable to deliver such sophisticated interventions adequately.
Moreover, in high-prevalence countries, the benefits of breastfeeding in reducing other infectious disease morbidity and mortality may outweigh the risks of HIV transmission.
Although perinatal HIV infections are downstream and not central to transmission, cost-effectiveness of interventions such as antiretroviral therapy and breast milk substitution makes them compelling options.
Several interventions have potential in preventing HIV infection.
One of them, voluntary counseling and testing, is gaining favor, but its sustained effect on behavior remains uncertain.
The most consistent effects have been observed among HIV discordant couples, but there are few studies of its efficacy in developing countries.
One recent trial showed a decrease in risky behaviors during the first year after counseling .
However, there was little effect on the incidence of STIs and the sustainability of the effect is unclear.
Costs per healthy-year-of-life saved were estimated at $249 to $346, but this may be optimistic.
It is also true that high-risk individuals might avoid such services.
Ultimately, female condoms or vaginal microbicides may become effective alternatives to male condoms in preventing HIV transmission, but female condom use is limited and evidence for efficacy is lacking.
Recent disappointing experience with the efficacy of nonoxynol-9 as a vaginal microbicide has underscored the need for more research.
A wealth of evidence indicates that male circumcision protects against HIV infection, but no clinical trials have been conducted.
Certain other HIV prevention interventions have not been shown to be particularly effective.
Mass media information and communication programs increase knowledge of HIV and are thought to create an environment permissive for prevention interventions.
However, in industrialized countries, there is little evidence for direct effect on behavior and there are few studies on the effects of mass media campaigns in developing countries.
As young people often have high HIV-incidence rates, protecting youth is key to stemming the epidemic.
Unfortunately, general educational programs for youth apparently have little effect on HIV or STI incidence, and there is little evidence for sustained safer behavior.
Focused interventions among high-risk youth may be a more effective approach.
Finally, programs to reduce the supply of female sex workers in Thailand have been unsuccessful; wherever there is demand for paid sex there will be a supply.
In contrast, raising legal costs of exploitation of child sex workers and enforcing legal sanctions may be effective .
The advent of highly effective antiretroviral therapy (HAART) has been a major advance and making it affordable or freely available for developing countries has become an issue of social equity.
In the West, HAART has reduced AIDS mortality, but the number of people living with AIDS has increased.
In addition, risky behavior has increased among gay men in North America, likely in response to the availability of HAART and the improved prospects of life with HIV, making its effect on HIV transmission uncertain.
We make five recommendations for controlling the spread of the epidemic.
First, HIV control programs need to incorporate the most effective evidence-based interventions and should focus on high-risk groups as a first priority.
This can be politically unpopular as these groups are often stigmatized, so advocacy is required.
Second, there should be increased spending on high-impact interventions.
The Joint United Nations Program on AIDS has estimated that HIV/AIDS-related expenditure in 1996-97 was only $549 million from the 64.7 countries that compose three-quarters of the world's HIV-infected population.
The World Bank's cumulative disbursements for HIV/AIDS is only $233 million.
In contrast, comprehensive HIV/AIDS and STI prevention services for all developing countries would cost $1.5 to 2.9 billion annually.
Third, money needs to be better spent.
Of 60 World Bank HIV/AIDS projects before 1992, only 48% have financed condom promotion and 57% have supported STI treatment, whereas 38% have financed treatment of AIDS.
The World Bank's most recent document on scaling up interventions in Africa barely discusses prevention interventions targeting high-risk groups .
Fourth, expanded research agendas should include studies on the effectiveness of male circumcision and vaginal microbicides, as well as cost-effective behavioral interventions for high-risk men and youth.
There is renewed optimism about vaccines: the work of the International AIDS Vaccine Initiative needs to be accelerated.
Fifth, we need enhanced monitoring of key interventions.
Countries need to collect reliable surveillance data, map transmission hot spots, estimate coverage for key interventions and evaluate the impact of interventions on HIV transmission.
Experience of the past two decades has taught us how the epidemic can be controlled.
The time to act is now.
World Bank, Confronting AIDS:
Public Priorities in a Global Epidemic (World Bank, Washington, DC, 1998).
Investing in Health Research and Development, Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Health Research Relating to Future Intervention Options (document TDR/Gen/96.1.), (WHO, Geneva, Switzerland, 1996).
R. M. May, R. M. Anderson, Nature 326 , 137 .
E. N. Ngugi et al.
, Lancet 2 , 887 .
M. Laga et al
. ,
Lancet 344 , 246 .
S. Moses et al. ,
AIDS 5 , 407 .
R. Machekano et al
. , Fifth Conference on Retroviral and Opportunistic Infections, Chicago, 1 to 5 February 1998, Foundation for Retrovirology and Human Health and NIAID (abstr.
no. 15) .
H. Grosskurth et al
. , Lancet 346 , 530 .
L. Gilson et al
. ,
Lancet 350 , 1805 .
R. Nduati et al. , JAMA 283 , 1167 .
L. A.Guay et al. , Lancet 354 , 795 .
E. Marseille et al
. , Lancet 354 , 803 .
M. Sweat et al
. , Lancet 356 , 113 .
D. Tarantola, Bull.
WHO 78 , 236 .
Intensifying Action Against HIV/AIDS in Africa: Responding to a Development Crisis (World Bank, Washington, DC, 1999).
www.worldbank.org/html/extdr/offrep/afr/aidstrat.pdf Supported by grants from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and the Canadian International Development Agency, and by the Commission on Macroeconomics and Health.
F.A.P. is the recipient of a Senior Scientist Award from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and a Canada Research Chair.
S.M. is the recipient of a Clinical Professor in Population Health Award from the Manitoba Medical Services Foundation.
The views expressed are those of the authors and not their affiliated institutions.
P. Jha is at the Economics Advisory Service, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
N. J. D. Nagelkerke, B. Willbond, S. Moses, and F. A. Plummer are in the Departments of Medical Microbiology, Community Health Sciences and Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada R3E 0W3.
N.J.D.N. is also in the Department of Public Health, University of Rotterdam, Rotterdam, and National Institute of Public Health and the Environment, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
E. N. Ngugi and F.A.P. are at the Department of Community Health, University of Nairobi, Nairobi, Kenya.
J. V. R. Prasada Rao is at the National AIDS Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi, India.
F.A.P. is also at the National Microbiology Laboratory, Health Canada, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
Ramasundaram, S .
Can India avoid being devastated by HIV?.
BMJ 324: 182-183
[Full Text]
Volume 292, Number 5515, Issue of 13 Apr 2001, pp.
224-225.
Behind a beating heart, fingers running fluidly across a piano, or a stomach cell shuffling nutrients to its neighbor are hundreds of motor proteins that make such motion possible.
Yet even as biologists have been classifying these proteins and delineating their structures, they have long debated one critical question: How moveth the motors themselves?
Now, a trio of biologists delivers another in a series of jolts to this field.
On page 844 , Wei Hua and colleagues Johnson Chung and Jeff Gelles of Brandeis University in Waltham, Massachusetts, dispute the widely accepted mechanism of motion for kinesin, a well-studied member of the motor protein class.
The three propose that kinesin, responsible for propelling cellular components and proteins along stiff fibers called microtubules, crawls like an inchworm rather than taking even, symmetrical steps.
The theory is striking for, among other issues, its pronouncement that kinesin's two structurally identical heads, clusters of amino acids that do most of the enzyme's work, perform vastly different tasks.
Already the work is prompting sharp words and reflection from those in the motor protein field.
Many of our beliefs and the models we've been proposing may turn out to be spectacularly wrong, says Steven Block, a biophysicist at Stanford University in Palo Alto, California, referring not only to the Hua paper but also to a parallel upheaval in the study of myosins, another major group of motor proteins.
Ironically, Gelles's group set out to prove the dominant theory of kinesin movement: that the enzyme's two heads alternately and symmetrically step over each other along the microtubule, a motion known as symmetric hand-over-hand.
To attempt to confirm hand-over-hand, the researchers made several adjustments that enabled them to follow individual kinesin molecules, which are normally just 70 nanometers long.
First, they anchored kinesin to a glass plate but let the microtubule, a far larger structure to which kinesin is attached, move freely.
Second, they slowed the motion of kinesin by restricting its access to energy-providing adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
Finally, to amplify minuscule microtubule movements, the group made the connection between kinesin and the plate more rigid.
No spinning around.
A microtubule didn't rotate as expected under kinesin's power. 
: W. HUA ET AL. 
When Gelles and colleagues let the motor run, they did not witness the scene they'd expected.
Symmetric hand-over-hand demands that each head make a 180 rotation for every 8-nanometer step it takes, says Wei Hua, now at Yale University.
But the scientists, whose technology was capable of detecting rotation above 31 , found none at all.
The group proposes a new catch-up model for kinesin movement: One head pushes forward 8 nanometers, stops, and drags the second along toward it.
Gelles's team was forced to make a secondary, decidedly unorthodox proposal to make its model fit with a basic rule of kinesin biology: that one ATP energy molecule is burned for every 8-nanometer step.
In hand-over-hand, the heads presumably alternate burning, or hydrolyzing, ATP.
Here, both heads forge the same 8-nanometer distance each time; therefore, only one head could be hydrolyzing the ATP molecule.
The other head, the scientists predict, is chemically inactive while kinesin moves.
That two identical structures could wind up with such divergent jobs is a hotly disputed point of the paper.
It's hard to envision how you could relegate [different] functions to the two heads, given that they're produced by the same gene, says Sharyn Endow, a molecular geneticist at Duke University in Durham, North Carolina.
Endow and others point to previous work they say shows that both heads hydrolyze ATP.
The authors of the new study stand by their story but admit they're as befuddled as everyone else.
Maybe there's a reason for [the presence of] two heads that we don't know, says Hua.
Meanwhile, other researchers, such as Joe Howard, director of the Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics in Dresden, Germany, favor yet a third model.
In asymmetric hand-over-hand, the kinesin heads step over each other but rotate little.
The mystery might be solved if researchers can overcome a technical challenge universal to kinesin motion studies: the difficulty distinguishing between the two tiny heads.
Scientists are experimenting with special dyes to do just that.
Myosin researchers can sympathize with their kinesin brethren.
Recent work on these motors, which control muscles and transport various proteins, shows that two family members don't move as believed.
Myosin VI, whose function remains a puzzle, apparently edges backward and takes far larger steps than its structure suggests is possible.
And myosin V has been found to stay stuck to its filament during motion rather than lifting off periodically.
Motor molecules are capable of some pretty surprising things that we might not have predicted, says Richard Cheney, a cell biologist at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
And they're taking scientists along for the roller-coaster ride.
Distinguishing Inchworm and Hand-Over-Hand Processive Kinesin Movement by Neck Rotation Measurements.
We describe results from a fully self-consistent three-dimensional hydrodynamical simulation of the formation of one of the first stars in the Universe.
In current models of structure formation, dark matter initially dominates, and pregalactic objects form because of gravitational instability from small initial density perturbations.
As they assemble via hierarchical merging, primordial gas cools through ro-vibrational lines of hydrogen molecules and sinks to the center of the dark matter potential well.
The high-redshift analog of a molecular cloud is formed.
As the dense, central parts of the cold gas cloud become self-gravitating, a dense core of ~100 M (where M is the mass of the Sun) undergoes rapid contraction.
At particle number densities greater than 10 9 per cubic centimeter, a 1 M protostellar core becomes fully molecular as a result of three-body H 2 formation.
Contrary to analytical expectations, this process does not lead to renewed fragmentation and only one star is formed.
The calculation is stopped when optical depth effects become important, leaving the final mass of the fully formed star somewhat uncertain.
At this stage the protostar is accreting material very rapidly (
~10
2 M year 1 ).
Radiative feedback from the star will not only halt its growth but also inhibit the formation of other stars in the same pregalactic object (at least until the first star ends its life, presumably as a supernova).
We conclude that at most one massive ( M 1 M ) metal-free star forms per pregalactic halo, consistent with recent abundance measurements of metal-poor galactic halo stars. 
1 Harvard Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. 2 Institute of Astronomy, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0HA, UK. 
3 Astrophysics Division, Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. 
4 Center for Astrophysics Space Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. 
How the Cosmic Dark Age Ended. 
Great Balls of Fire. 
Volume 295, Number 5552, Issue of 4 Jan 2002, pp.
93-98.
1 Department of Physics and Frederick Seitz Materials Research Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, 61801, USA.2 Department of Physics, Soongsil University, Seoul, Korea; Department of Physics and Frederick Seitz Materials Research Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, 61801, USA.3 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.4 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Laboratory for Research on the Structure of Matter, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.5 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Laboratory for Research on the Structure of Matter, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
* To whom correspondence should be addressed.
E-mail: ayazdani@uiuc.edu .
Arrays of C 60 molecules nested inside single-walled nanotubes represent a class of nanoscale materials having tunable properties.
We report electronic measurements of this system using a scanning tunneling microscope and demonstrate that the encapsulated C 60 molecules modify the local electronic structure of the nanotube.
Our measurements and calculations also show that a periodic array of C 60 molecules gives rise to a hybrid electronic band, which derives its character from both the nanotube states and the C 60 molecular orbitals.
Satellite observations suggest that the thermal radiation emitted by Earth to space increased by more than 5 watts per square meter, while reflected sunlight decreased by less than 2 watts per square meter, in the tropics over the period 1985-2000, with most of the increase occurring after 1990.
By analyzing temporal changes in the frequency of occurrence of emitted thermal and reflected solar fluxes, the effects of El Ni o-Southern Oscillation are minimized, and an independent longer-time-scale variation of the radiation budget is identified.
Similar analyses of upper tropospheric humidity, cloud amount, surface air temperature, and vertical velocity confirm that these flux changes are associated with a decadal-time-scale strengthening of the tropical Hadley and Walker circulations.
Equatorial convective regions have intensified in upward motion and moistened, while both the equatorial and subtropical subsidence regions have become drier and less cloudy. 
1 Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Columbia University, Palisades, NY 10964, USA. 
2 NASA/Goddard Institute for Space Studies, 2880 Broadway, New York, NY 10025, USA. Tropical Surprises. 
Evidence for Large Decadal Variability in the Tropical Mean Radiative Energy Budget.
F ew medical men have exercised as much influence for as long as Galen of Pergamum .
His ideas dominated medicine in the Byzantine world from A.D. 300 onward and, through the medium of translation, in the world of Islam and in Western Europe from the 12th to the 17th century.
As Yunani (Greek) medicine, they still form one of the learned traditions of medicine in the modern Muslim world .
Yet by presenting repeatedly his conclusions rather than the empirical evidence and procedures on which they were based, his followers unwittingly helped to create the common view of Galen as bookish, dogmatic, and authoritarian, and as a stumbling-block to medical progress until the Renaissance.
Over the last 30 years, scholars, aided by the rediscovery of many of Galen's works in Arabic translation, have begun the process of rehabilitation.
Galen achieved his authority through abundant energy, massive self-confidence, enormous learning, near impeccable logic, and cogent rhetoric, allied to remarkable practical skills as an experimenter, observer, and clinician.
His career was unusual for a doctor in the ancient world.
Taking up medicine only at the age of 17, he then spent a decade in medical studies, including 4 or 5 years at Alexandria, the greatest medical center of antiquity.
In A.D. 157, he returned to his native Pergamum (Bergama, western Turkey), where, among other duties, he cared for the health of a troop of gladiators.
He soon moved on again, arriving in Rome for the first time in A.D. 162, where he quickly established a reputation by public dissections of animals.
In 166, he fled Rome for his native Pergamum, either because of the hostility of his less successful competitors or to avoid the onset of an epidemic, perhaps of smallpox.
He was not forgotten, though.
In 168, he was summoned to join the Roman Emperors on campaign.
From then on, until his death around 216, he remained in imperial service.
In addition to his intermittent royal duties, he treated enormous numbers of patients in Rome (and some by correspondence).
But above all, he wrote.
Even though half of his total output has been lost over the centuries, Galen's surviving works in Greek, some 115 titles, constitute about 10% of all that remains of Greek literature from before A.D. 300.
Another 50 treatises survive in translation, mainly in Arabic or medieval Latin.
This prolific outpouring of ideas on topics as various as anatomy, physiology, pharmacology, logic, ethics, and lexicography was made possible by his staff of shorthand writers, who took down his words as he discoursed to friends, colleagues, and patients.
His message was simple and powerful.
The true doctor required sound learning, sober thought, and practical experience.
All these could be found in Galen's hero, the 5th-century- B.C. physician, Hippocrates of Cos, and in the writings that constitute the Hippocratic Corpus.
According to Galen, Hippocrates had laid down the first principles of medicine, most notably that health and disease depended on maintaining an appropriate balance between the four main fluids, or humors, of the body, blood, bile, black bile, and phlegm.
Galen was not alone in following Hippocrates, but his was the interpretation that became the norm in all subsequent discussions of humoralism.
But Galen's Hippocrates was based far more on Galen's own idealized image of himself than on any ancient texts .
The second major strand in his writings was his insistence that the good doctor was also a philosopher, a thinking individual.
Not only must he practice morality in his dealings with patients, but he required logical ability to derive the right conclusions from observations and diagnose correctly.
Galen's most innovative philosophical treatise, On scientific demonstration , is now mostly lost, but his books on logic have earned the approval of both medieval and modern scholars for their precision.
His conclusions are almost always correctly derived from his premises: it is the premises themselves that are disputable.
The long-winded repetitions in his writings and his reliance on logic to fill in gaps where observation was lacking damaged Galen's subsequent reputation, particularly because it obscured the extent to which he believed in the importance of accurate observation and practical skills.
Although he might, if challenged, prefer a doctor who could think to one reliant solely on experience, Galen stressed over and over again the unity of reason and experience.
He himself was a shrewd and keen-sighted observer.
His exemplary tales of his own cures show how one can profit from observing the slightest of changes in the patient--and in the paraphernalia of the sickroom.
He had a sharp eye, wherever he traveled, noting the variety of wheat growing in northern Greece, the fighting habits of weasels, and the annoying behavior of young children, some of whom, he commented ruefully, seem to have been born naughty.
Observation was linked in Galen to wide practical experience.
Patients flocked to him with stomach complaints and dislocated limbs, with fevers and symptoms of stress.
Establishing the connection between mental and physical problems was one of his proudest achievements, although a tactful withdrawal from public life was all he could recommend to senators who approached him, afraid of being murdered by the bloodthirsty emperor Commodus .
Nowhere is his emphasis on practical experience more obvious than in his work on anatomy.
His teachers, themselves trained in Alexandria, had taught him the importance of anatomy for understanding the workings of the body, and he readily admitted its value for the surgeon.
He gained his first post in part through his surgical skills:
Galen demonstrated delicate wound-management and, on one occasion, successfully removed a suppurating breastbone.
His advice on safe suturing, preferably with catgut, shows a sound understanding of the differences between the various tissues of the body.
But he went far beyond his teachers in insisting on the fundamental need for the doctor to dissect, dissect, dissect.
He claimed to have performed a dissection every day for most of his working life--partly to hone his surgical skills but mainly to investigate the body.
But although in the course of performing operations, Galen had seen inside the human body and was relatively familiar with human bones, he regretted that he had never had the opportunity to dissect one systematically.
Religious, social, and even medical objections had prevented the dissection of human corpses for 500 years.
All his dissections were performed on animals, mainly rhesus monkeys, pigs, sheep, goats, and, on one famous occasion, the emperor's pet elephant.
These animals were chosen both for their similarity to humans (for Galen admitted the problem of generalizing from one species to another) and for their effect on the audience.
The loud squeal of a piglet suddenly ended by a spinal ligature demonstrated dramatically a link between the two events; by contrast, the pained face of a monkey as the knife entered should be avoided by turning it away from the audience .
Galen was an exceptional anatomist.
He repeated experiments on blood flow first performed 500 years earlier by the Alexandrian anatomist Erasistratus, and, as far as is known, never repeated since then.
But his greatest achievement was a systematic study of the nervous system.
By tying or cutting the spinal cord at each vertebra to see its effect, he discovered the recurrent laryngeal nerves and established the workings of the thoracic nerves in breathing.
Comparative anatomy has its perils, however.
Galen's anatomy of the womb is that of a dog, his positioning of the kidneys that of a pig, and his anatomy of the brain--the result of some delicate work with the knife--that of a cow or goat.
One such error had important consequences.
The presence of a network of nerves at the base of the ox brain (the rete mirabile) provided Galen with what he considered to be anatomical proof that the Athenian philosopher Plato (427-347 B.C. ) had been right to divide the human soul into three parts, each with its own seat and system of conduits.
Galen developed this notion through dissection.
Food digested in the stomach was passed to the liver, where it was turned into blood.
This blood, moving in the veins, provided nutriment for the body.
Most of what was not needed for nutriment was excreted, but a small amount seeped through the septum of the heart from one side to the other.
In the left ventricle, mixed with air drawn in from the lungs, it was transformed into arterial blood, which as it flowed in the arteries gave life and energy to the body.
A tiny fraction of this blood underwent a third transformation in the rete mirabile to become psychic pneuma in the brain.
This pneuma, or spirit, operating in the channels of the nerves, was the agent of sensation that transmitted perceptions to the brain.
It was also the means whereby the reasoning part of the soul in the brain could control the rest of the body and instigate voluntary action.
Galen's tripartite anatomical system, based on the liver, heart, and brain, reinforced and was in turn supported by Plato's notion of a tripartite soul.
It was based on accurate animal dissection and intelligent reasoning.
We now know many of Galen's conclusions to be false, but for a long time they were extremely hard to refute without the talents of a Galen.
Later interpreters forgot or, since Galen's major anatomical writings were hard to find, never read his warnings about relying solely on animals or on descriptions in books, and omitted his hesitations and qualifications in their systematic exposition of what they believed were assured facts.
Certainly, his tripartition made more sense of the body than Aristotle's notion of the heart as the unique seat of the soul.
But Galen did not reject Aristotelianism entirely.
His explanation of natural processes such as the transformation of matter depended on Aristotelian concepts, and he was convinced, like Aristotle, that the body had been carefully designed by a provident and purposeful creator (a view that commended Galenism to Christians and Muslims alike).
Throughout Galen's writings, we find this insistence on practical experiment.
His studies of the pulse in health and disease show many valid correlations between illnesses and pulsation, even though Galen did not envisage the heart as a pump.
His thousands of pages on pharmacology not only repeat many prescriptions from authors now lost to us, but also reveal him as an inveterate hunter for new or neglected drugs, be it in the backwoods of Mysia (modern Turkey), the copper mines of Cyprus, or the imperial storehouses in Rome .
The very size of his achievement both daunted his successors and damaged Galen's reputation.
To pick a way through his writings without indexes or finding aids was almost impossible.
Besides, copying out a big treatise, such as his Method of Healing , equivalent to 500 pages in a modern book, was extraordinarily expensive and time-consuming until printing presses were developed .
Hence, Galen was transformed into Galenism, reduced to summaries, selections, and guides that left out his queries, doubts, and practical experiences and emphasized the doctrinaire.
His anatomical conclusions were repeated, but not his methods.
Paradoxically, the overthrow of Galenism in the Renaissance was due precisely to the rediscovery of Galen's methods by Vesalius ( A.D. 1514-1564) and Harvey ( A.D. 1578-1657).
The medical scholars of the first half of the 16th century had returned to reading Galen in the original Greek.
They emphasized his superiority over his later interpreters, stressing his learning and the centrality of anatomy in his view of medicine.
Vesalius, while openly contemptuous of Galen, followed his advice and methodology to produce a new anatomy of the human body.
Harvey, more conservative, repeated Galen's experiments to overthrow his tripartite system of physiology.
The spirit of Galen can thus be said to have triumphed over his conclusions.
Claudii Galeni Opera Omnia , 20 vols.
in 22 (K. Knobloch, Leipzig, 1821-1833; reprinted by G. Olms, Hildersheim, 1965).
Galen, Selected Works , P. N. Singer, Ed. and Transl.
(Oxford Univ.
Press, Oxford, 1997).
O. Temkin, Galenism:
The Rise and Decline of a Medical Philosophy (Cornell Univ.
Press, Ithaca, 1973).
W. D. Smith, The Hippocratic Tradition (Cornell Univ.
Press, Ithaca, 1979).
G. E. R. Lloyd, Methods and Problems in Greek Science (Cambridge Univ.
Press, Cambridge, 1991), pp.
398-416.
F. Kudlien, R. Durling, Eds.,
Galen's Method of Healing
(E. J. Brill, Leiden, 1991).
J. Rocca, Galen and the Brain
(E. J. Brill, Leiden, 2002).
C. R. S. Harris, The Heart and the Vascular System in Ancient Greek Medicine, from Alcmaeon to Galen (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1973).
A. Debru, Ed.,
Galen on Pharmacology, Philosophy, History, and Medicine (E. J. Brill, Leiden, 1997).
Galen, On the Therapeutic Method, Books I and II , R. J. Hankinson, Ed. and Transl.
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1991).
The author is in the Wellcome Trust Centre for the History of Medicine, University College London, Euston House, 24 Eversholt Street, London NW1 1AD, UK.
E-mail: v.nutton@ucl.ac.uk Volume 295, Number 5556, Issue of 1 Feb 2002, pp.
800-801.
Although the global response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic in the developing world has, in general, been inadequate, there are key interventions which have been proven to be effective in reducing the incidence of HIV and relevant risky behaviors.
We review and analyze these interventions according to three criteria: importance to HIV transmission, amenability to change, and cost-effectiveness.
P. Jha is at the Economics Advisory Service, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
N. J. D. Nagelkerke, B. Willbond, S. Moses, and F. A. Plummer are in the Departments of Medical Microbiology, Community Health Sciences and Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada R3E 0W3.
N.J.D.N. is also in the Department of Public Health, University of Rotterdam, Rotterdam, and National Institute of Public Health and the Environment, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
E. N. Ngugi and F.A.P. are at the Department of Community Health, University of Nairobi, Nairobi, Kenya.
J. V. R. Prasada Rao is at the National AIDS Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi, India.
F.A.P. is also at the National Microbiology Laboratory, Health Canada, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
Ramasundaram, S .
Can India avoid being devastated by HIV?.
BMJ 324: 182-183
[Full Text]
Volume 292, Number 5515, Issue of 13 Apr 2001, pp.
224-225.
At Jackson, Tenn.North Georgia vs. Dillard, La. , 10 a.m.
Auburn Montgomery, Ala. vs. Houston Baptist , 11:45 a.m.
Central State, Ohio vs. Vanguard, Calif. , 1:30 p.m.
Edward Waters, Fla. vs. Oklahoma City , 3:15 p.m.
Benedict, S.C. vs. Campbellsville, Ky. ,
5:30 p.m.
Southern Nazarene, Okla. vs. St. Francis, Ill. ,
7:15 p.m.
Union, Tenn. vs. McKendree, Ill. ,
9:30 p.m.
Lindsey Wilson, Ky. vs. Montana-Western , 11:15 p.m.Mobile, Ala. vs. Shorter, Ga. , 10 a.m.
Brescia, Ky. vs. Azusa Pacific, Calif. ,
11:45 a.m.
Lewis-Clark State, Idaho vs. Georgetown, Ky. , 1:30 p.m.
Oklahoma Baptist vs. Xavier, La. , 3:15 p.m.
Fresno Pacific, Calif. vs. Freed-Hardeman, Tenn. , 5:30 p.m.
Columbia, Mo. vs. Lambuth, Tenn. , 7:15 p.m.
Life, Ga. vs. Cumberland, Ky. ,
9 p.m.
Trevecca Nazarene, Tenn. vs. Oklahoma Christian , 10:45 p.m.
Mobile, Ala.-Shorter, Ga. winner vs. Benedict, S.C.-Campbellsville, Ky. winner, 10:00 a.m.North Georgia-Dillard, La. winner vs. Lewis-Clark State, Idaho-Georgetown, Ky. winner 11:45 a.m.Oklahoma Baptist-Xavier, La. winner vs. Auburn Montgomery, Ala.-Houston Baptist, 1:30 p.m.
Brescia, Ky.-Azusa Pacific, Calif. winner vs. Edward Waters, Fla.-Oklahoma City, 3:15 p.m.
Central State, Ohio-Vanguard, Calif. winner vs. Columbia, Mo.-Lambuth, Tenn. winner, 5:30 p.m.
Southern Nazarene, Okla.-St.
Francis, Ill. winner vs. Fresno Pacific, Calif.-Freed-Hardeman, Tenn. winner, 7:15 p.m.
Union, Tenn.-McKendree, Ill. winner vs. Life, Ga.-Cumberland, Ky. winner, 9 p.m.
Trevecca Nazarene, Tenn.-Oklahoma Christian winner vs. Lindsey Wilson, Ky.
-Montana-Western winner, 10:45 p.m.
Brescia, Ky.-Azusa Pacific, Calif./Edward Waters, Fla.-Oklahoma City winner vs. North Georgia-Dillard, La./Lewis-Clark State, Idaho-Georgetown, Ky. winner, 3 p.m.
Southern Nazarene, Okla.-St.
Francis, Ill./Fresno Pacific, Calif.-Freed-Hardeman, Tenn. winner vs. Mobile, Ala.-Shorter, Ga./Benedict, S.C.-Campbellsville, Ky. winner, 5 p.m.
Union, Tenn.-McKendree, Ill./Life, Ga.-Cumberland, Ky. winner vs. Mobile, Ala.-Shorter, Ga./Benedict, S.C.-Campbellsville, Ky. winner, 7 p.m.
Central State, Ohio-Vanguard, Calif./Columbia, Mo.-Lambuth, Tenn. winner vs. Trevecca Nazarene, Tenn.-Oklahoma Christian/Lindsey Wilson, Ky.
-Montana-Western winner, 9 p.m.Quarterfinal winners, 7 and 9 p.m.Semifinal winners, 8 p.m.
Crash investigators are paying special attention to a single section of the tail fin that snapped off American Airlines Flight 587 because it may show evidence of previous damage.
The carbon-fiber piece has a series of cracks that do not appear on the other five points that snapped between the tail and the fuselage, sources familiar with the investigation told USA TODAY.
Investigators and experts familiar with composite materials like the one that broke on the jet caution that it is too early to say whether the cracks were on the tail before the crash or resulted from the tail being wrenched from the jet.
But if the cracks were present before the accident, it could help explain why the vertical tail fin flew off the Airbus A300, sending it spinning out of control.
Flight 587 crashed Nov. 12 less than 2 minutes after taking off from John F. Kennedy International Airport on a flight to the Dominican Republic.
All 260 people aboard and five local residents on the ground died.
The jet was buffeted by relatively minor turbulence, and later swung sideways sharply three times.
But National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) officials have said that these forces should not have been severe enough to structurally damage the jet's tail fin.
Some kind of pre-existing damage had weakened the tail, which allowed it to break loose.
The jet did encounter a major turbulence incident in 1994, but American Airlines inspected it afterward and found no damage.
The tail design was not strong enough.
However, Airbus extensively tested the tail and subjected it to severe stresses that exceeded what the company believed it would receive in flight.
Some force that investigators have not yet identified caused the tail to snap.
In theory, an unusually strong gust of wind could break the tail, though investigators have no evidence this occurred and consider it unlikely. 
Similarly, the jet's rudder, which moves the nose right and left, swung sharply several times shortly before the tail section came loose.
It is possible that the pilots moved the rudder too much in response to earlier turbulence and those rudder movements created forces that damaged the tail.
Jets are built to withstand the most extreme rudder movements to one side.
But some experts worry that swinging of the rudder from side to side could cause stresses that designers had not anticipated.
The vertical fin, which helps a jet fly straight and stable, had been attached at six points at the top of the fuselage.
At most of those points, the fin's carbon-fiber plastic material tore off just above where it was bolted to metal attachments on the fuselage.
But on the front left attachment, the carbon-fiber material broke at the area where the bolt is located.
And, unlike the other five attachments, the material contains a series of cracks near the breaking point.
Such cracks could indicate "delamination," which occurs when the multiple layers that make up the material begin to separate.
Delamination can significantly weaken the material.
As work on the investigation transfers from New York to Washington, experts both in and outside the NTSB will begin inspecting the material to determine whether delamination could have played a role in weakening the structure.
Paul Lagace, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology professor who is a specialist in the composite materials that severed, cautioned that it takes long and careful examination before scientists can determine whether delamination caused a break or occurred as a result of the structure coming apart.
When the Toronto Blue Jays opted to bypass Dave Stewart for the general manager's job Wednesday, Stewart immediately resigned his position with the team and accepted the role of pitching coach with the Brewers.
The 44-year-old Stewart had been with the Blue Jays since 1998 but fumed over getting passed over for the general manager's job.
As pitching coach, he returns to the role he filled for the San Diego Padres during the 1998 season.
Stewart insisted baseball owners use racist hiring policies in filling their top front-office jobs and he resigned Wednesday as Toronto's assistant general manager because the Blue Jays didn't promote him.
Stewart, a four-time 20-game winner, had been an assistant GM with Toronto since November 1998.
The Blue Jays hired J.P. Ricciardi, Oakland's former player personnel director, to replace general manager Gord Ash, whom they fired during the final week of the season.
"They think the only people capable of doing these jobs are white people, not minorities," Stewart, who is black, said in a telephone interview from Ontario.
The only black general manager in the major leagues in Kenny Williams of the Chicago White Sox. 
Blue Jays president Paul Godfrey denied race was a factor in the decision to hire Ricciardi.
"Why did I give it to somebody else other than the guy inside?
Because J.R. Ricciardi had something
no other candidate had he had a game plan and a strategy both for the major league team and the minor league team," Godfrey said.
"I feel terrible about it because Dave was given serious consideration and was on the short list.
This decision isn't personal.
If I would have done it on personal friendship, I think Dave Stewart would have gotten the job."
Stewart is among several minority candidates bypassed for general manager jobs since the end of the season in favor of whites.
The Los Angeles Dodgers promoted Danny Evans, who had been in their front office, to GM; Texas hired GM John Hart, who left Cleveland; and the Indians promoted Hart's assistant, Mark Shapiro, as part of a transition planned last spring.
While Rangers owner Tom Hicks interviewed other candidates for the Rangers' job, the team interviewed New York Mets senior assistant general manager Omar Minaya only with a headhunter.
"I'm not just speaking for me, I'm speaking for a lot of minority candidates who have not been given the opportunity," Stewart said.
"The system doesn't work.
The playing field is never going to be equal.
The man I work for here, Paul Godfrey, told me he would like me to take on his manager's job before he hired Buck Martinez.
"Why was it OK to hire me to manage his club but not OK for me to be his general manager?
It's just little messages.
I made it perfectly clear this is the direction I wanted to be in.
It's just little signs that it's perfectly acceptable for me to be on the field
but there's discomfort with me being in front-office management.
"
Stewart spoke Wednesday with baseball commissioner Bud Selig, who has told teams they must consider at least one minority for each major front-office and manager opening.
"I think Bud is doing most of the talking on trying to get things accomplished in a network that's not willing to open up their minds or open up their eyes," Stewart said.
Selig said during the World Series he was frustrated with baseball's lack of progress on minority hiring, but he has not taken any new action.
"Whenever the next meeting is, whenever I call it, it's probably January, it's a subject
I want to talk to all the clubs about," Selig said.
"I don't have any criticism at this point.
Everyone has followed my memorandum.
But we do need to do better."
Godfrey wasn't sure what the solution is.
"The big difficulty in this type of situation," Godfrey said, "is surely we don't want to get to the stage of doing it by a percentage that's reverse discrimination.
What you hope is people will be equal-opportunity employers.
In every place I've been the CEO, I've been an equal-opportunity employer for not only minorities and visible minorities, but for people for different orientations as well."
Stewart criticized the constant rotation of GMs to different teams but praised Chicago White Sox owner Jerry Reinsdorf for hiring Williams.
"Reinsdorf is open enough to know there is quality and there is intelligence in any human being," Stewart said.
He praised the Blue Jays for giving him "an opportunity to do just about anything you wanted to do since I've been here: adviser to the general manager, assistant general manager, run development, director of player personnel."
But after Godfrey told Stewart on Tuesday night he wasn't getting the GM job, he decided to leave.
"I didn't see any point in continuing on here," Stewart said.
Stewart, who turned down a similar offer from the Texas Rangers to take over Milwuakee's pitching corps, will be asked to tutor one of the most promising young staffs in the game.
In addition to All-Star right-hander Ben Sheets, Milwaukee has youngsters Ruben Quevedo and Nick Neugebauer.
The Brewers also named a hitting coach Wednesday, hiring 16-year veteran Gary Matthews.
A career .281 hitter, the 51-year-old Matthews served as the Blue Jays' batting instructor in 1998-99.
The Brewers have a potentially devastating middle of the lineup with Jeromy Burnitz, Geoff Jenkins, Richie Sexson and Jose Hernandez but all four have trouble making contact.
Milwaukee went 68-94 in its first season in Miller Park and manager Davey Lopes had his staff revamped.
Contributing: The Associated Press, SportsTicker.
Yugoslavia (AP) Ethnic Albanians anxious to determine their own futures mobbed polling stations Saturday to vote in the first province-wide elections since NATO and the United Nations broke Slobodan Milosevic's grip on Kosovo.
Lines snaked around schools and public buildings, but apart from some pushing and shoving, little serious trouble marred the vote to choose deputies for a parliament that will run Kosovo together with the United Nations and the alliance.
"I thank God for giving me life to see this moment," said Fatime Krasniqi, 61, who lost nine family members during the 1998-99 war.
"I hope something better will happen to us now."
Ethnic Albanians see the vote as nothing short of a step toward independence a concept that frightened many minority Serbs into staying home.
Serbs remained split over participating in an election many fear will even further dilute the influence of the central Yugoslav government in Belgrade on the province.
While official election results were to be released Monday, a respected non-governmental organization monitoring the vote, Kosova Action for Civic Initiatives, said late Saturday that its exit polls showed that the party of pacifist leader Ibrahim Rugova took 44.7% of the vote.
The party of former rebel leader Hashim Thaci, the Democratic Party of Kosovo, finished second with 23.7% while Alliance for the Future of Kosovo finished third with 8.3% of the vote, Kosova Action said.
A handful of smaller parties got the remainder of the vote, including 10.1% that went to a coalition of Serb parties.
Polls opened with international and local police officers stationed at every polling station door.
NATO peacekeepers patrolled the nearby areas, stopping cars leading to some stations and parking armored personnel carriers in front of others for extra impact.
Voters were electing a 120-seat national assembly that in turn will choose a president and form a provincial administration to govern alongside the U.N. officials and NATO-led peacekeepers who drove Milosevic's forces out of Kosovo in 1999.
Serbs are guaranteed at least 10 seats in the future parliament, but can get 20 seats if their turnout is high.
However, by the close of polls, turnout among eligible Serb voters was only 46%, compared with 65% among the province's ethnic Albanians, said the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, which was monitoring the election.
In Serbia and Montenegro, home to about 200,000 Kosovo Serbs who fled after the war, turnout was higher at 57%, OSCE said.
Secretary-General Lord Robertson called the elections "a remarkable step forward toward normality" in the Yugoslav province.
And the top U.N. official in Kosovo, Hans Haekkerup, said the vote was critical to the reconciliation process between the ethnic Albanian and Serb communities.
International officials and Yugoslav President Vojislav Kostunica had tried hard to persuade Serbs to take part.
Some local Serb factions were opposed to the ballot and some Serb residents whispered of receiving threatening phone calls and letters urging a boycott.
In the divided city of Kosovska Mitrovica, only journalists wandered around streets made dark by one of Kosovo's constant power failures.
Many people stayed home, fearful of incidents on election day despite stepped up patrols by the peacekeepers.
One Serb voter, Verica Stavric, 73, said she was not afraid.
"We're only living for right now," she said just after casting her ballot in the enclave of Laplje Selo.
"I hope, for God's sake, it will be better."
Dozens of Serbs have been killed by ethnic Albanians and tens of thousands have fled Kosovo since forces loyal to Milosevic were ousted after 78 days of NATO air strikes in 1999.
The bombing campaign ended fighting that killed at least 10,000 people, mostly ethnic Albanians.
Copyright 2001
The Associated Press.
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
A senior opposition spokesman, Bismillah Khan, said anti-Taliban forces pushed as far as Mir Bacha Kot, about 12 miles north of the capital, and were awaiting further orders.
"We are at the gate of Kabul," Khan declared in a satellite telephone conversation.
President Bush has urged the opposition to hold off on seizing the capital until a broad-based government can be formed to replace the Taliban, the Islamic militia that rules most of Afghanistan.
While some opposition leaders have said they agree, some commanders on the ground were eager to advance.
It was unclear whether the opposition had gained so much momentum that an assault on Kabul was inevitable.
The action north of Kabul came as opposition fighters claimed to have entered Herat, the main city in western Afghanistan, and to be closing in on the last Taliban stronghold in the north.
Opposition spokesman Mohammed Abil said the opposition entered Herat in the morning.
Iranian radio, broadcasting from Herat, said Taliban troops were fleeing or surrendering.
An official in the Taliban's Information Ministry said "possibly Herat has collapsed."
Herat sits along the main road to Kandahar more than 300 miles to the southeast which is the birthplace of the Taliban and home of Taliban supreme leader Mullah Mohammed Omar and Osama bin Laden.
The fall of Herat would build on the opposition advance from the north, where Taliban control has collapsed since the fall of Mazar-e-Sharif to the opposition on Friday.
In Mazar-e-Sharif, men lined up at barber shops to have their Taliban-mandated beards shaved off.
Women were discarding the all-encompassing burqas and music banned by the Taliban could be heard coming from cassette players in shops, according to the Afghan Islamic Press.
Returning refugees streamed back into villages that they had not seen in months or years in a day of celebration across northern Afghan territory free from the Taliban.
Abil, speaking by satellite telephone, said alliance forces were preparing to move against Kunduz, the last northern city still held by the Taliban.
The area is populated mostly by ethnic Pashtuns the same ethnic group as the Taliban while the rest of the north is largely Tajik, Uzbek and Shiite Muslim.
Late Monday, Tehran radio reported that the opposition forces had taken control of Kunduz.
Opposition spokesmen contacted by satellite telephone said they did not have updated reports on the operation.
In Kabul, meanwhile, Taliban Supreme Court judges indefinitely postponed the trial of eight foreign aid workers, saying they feared their anger over the U.S. airstrikes would prevent them from making a fair ruling.
The defendants two American women, two Australians and four Germans are accused of spreading Christianity in Muslim Afghanistan.
Developments on the battlefield were so fast-moving that many of the reports could not be immediately verified.
Foreign journalists do not have access to many of the front lines and have been speaking to opposition commanders by satellite phone.
On the front north of Kabul, U.S. aircraft, including B-52 bombers, bombed Taliban positions Monday, drawing only sporadic anti-aircraft fire.
Abil said anti-Taliban fighters had pushed the Taliban back six miles along the old road to Kabul.
At one point along the front, fighters advanced nine miles in less than an hour, stopping only after meeting heavy Taliban resistance.
Opposition forces captured Qarabagh district, 15 miles north of Kabul, Abil said.
Trucks of shouting fighters rumbled through Rabat, a town along the route of advance.
Asked where the trucks were going, one opposition soldier, Commander Adel, shouted "to Kabul, to Kabul."
The fighters had pictures of Massood, the alliance's military chief, who was killed by a suicide attack just before the Sept. 11 terror attacks in the United States.
Jubilant opposition fighters near Jabal Saraj, about 30 miles north of Kabul, said Taliban soldiers in several key strongholds on the western side of the contested Shomali plain were surrendering.
In Kabul itself, pickup trucks camouflaged with brown mud raced about, ferrying Taliban fighters to and from the front.
Residents could hear the steady roar of jets heading toward the north.
The speed of the Taliban collapse, which began Friday with the fall of Mazar-e-Sharif, suggests that many local commanders and Taliban fighters are switching sides rather than offering stiff resistance.
Abil said the northern alliance has sent radio messages to Taliban commanders and village elders urging them to hand over Pakistani, Arab and Chechen volunteers fighting with the Islamic militia.
"We want to take these foreigners alive to show who is fighting against us," he said.
He claimed the greatest resistance was coming from the foreign fighters.
Within three days, the opposition has expanded its control from about 10% of the country to nearly half.
It remained unclear whether the opposition could maintain that momentum as they approach Taliban strongholds in the southern Pashtun heartland.
In Islamabad, the Taliban's ambassador in Pakistan, Abdul Salam Zaeef, acknowledged that the Islamic militia had withdrawn from seven northern provinces.
"The Islamic army of the Taliban withdrew from these provinces in an organized way to avoid civilian casualties," he said in Pakistan's capital Islamabad.
Washington wants the opposition to hold off on assaulting Kabul to avoid a repeat of factional fighting that destroyed the capital and killed an estimated 50,000 people from 1992 to 1996, when the opposition governed.
Abil said the opposition had no plans to enter Kabul, which it lost to the Taliban in 1996.
But some commanders said an offensive was inevitable.
"We will have to enter Kabul," said Shahabuddin, sitting on an armored personnel carrier in Bagram, two miles from the front. "
The Taliban will take people inside the city as hostages.
It will be our job to defend the people."
Two French radio journalists and a German magazine reporter were killed Sunday when their convoy was hit in northeastern Takhar province, Radio France Internationale and RTL radio announced in Paris.
Copyright 2001
The Associated Press.
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
SportsTicker)
Lou Piniella, who led the Seattle Mariners to the most wins in the history of the game, was named American League Manager of the Year on Wednesday. 
Piniella, who was third in the voting last year, stayed with the Mariners this season, bypassing the opportunity to move to a bigger market and remaining despite knowing that the club likely would lose one of the league's biggest stars in Alex Rodriguez. 
Rodriguez left for the Texas Rangers, but the Mariners added Japanese sensation Ichiro Suzuki and were on their way to a landmark season.
Seattle won 116 games, tying the major league record set by the Chicago Cubs in 1906. 
Piniella received 22 first-place votes and 128 points in the balloting of the Baseball Writers Association of America.
Voting was conducted at the end of the regular season. 
Piniella won the award previously in 1995 and is the only Seattle manager to earn the honor. 
Art Howe of the Oakland Athletics was the runner-up for the third straight season, receiving five first-place votes and 77 points. 
The A's posted the second-best winning percentage in baseball history after the All-Star break, going 58-17.
Oakland's 102-60 mark was the second best in the game. 
Tom Kelly, who called it quits after guiding the Minnesota Twins back to contention, received the remaining first-place vote and was third with 25 points. 
Jimy Williams, who was fired as manager of the Boston Red Sox on August 16 with his team sporting a 65-53 record, finished fourth in the voting with 12 points. 
Joe Torre of the New York Yankees was fourth with eight points.
Charlie Manuel of the Cleveland Indians and Mike Scioscia of the Anaheim Angels each had one third-place vote.
Schroeder announced Tuesday that Germany would offer armored vehicles equipped to detect nuclear, biological and chemical weapons; about 100 special forces; a medical evacuation unit; air transport and naval forces to protect shipping lanes.
Schroeder said Germany was responding to a U.S. request for military help as part of the international coalition against terrorism after the Sept. 11 attacks on New York and Washington.
However, he said there were no immediate plans to send German ground troops to Afghanistan or participate in airstrikes.
Copyright 2001
The Associated Press.
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
President Bush turns his attention today to preparations for a crucial summit with Russian President Vladimir Putin after a weekend of diplomacy and tough words on the war on terrorism at the United Nations.
On Sunday, Bush paid tribute to military veterans at a prayer breakfast and marked 2 months since the Sept. 11 attacks with a visit to the World Trade Center rubble.
"The evil ones have roused a mighty nation, a mighty land," he said at the prayer breakfast. "
And for however long it takes, I am determined that we will prevail."
In a blunt speech Saturday to the U.N. General Assembly, Bush said, "Every nation has a stake in this cause."
He demanded that countries do more to root out terrorists and block their sources of money.
"Some governments still turn a blind eye to terrorists, hoping the threat will pass them by.
They are mistaken," he said.
Aides said his warnings were aimed at Iraq, Lebanon, Syria and Iran.
It was Bush's first trip to the United Nations.
The meeting had been set for Sept. 24 but was postponed by the attacks.
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat called the speech "important, positive and constructive."
In meetings beginning Tuesday in Washington and later at Bush's ranch in Crawford, Texas, Bush and Putin may finalize an agreement allowing the United States to develop and test a missile-defense shield.
They are expected to reach an understanding without amending or nullifying the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, which bars national defenses.
The presidents also are expected to announce plans to cut their nuclear arsenals to about 2,000 warheads each.
Currently, the United States has about 7,000, Russia about 6,000.
Pakistani leader Pervez Musharraf, a key U.S. ally in its military campaign against Afghanistan's Taliban regime, pledged support for the U.S. campaign after meeting privately with Bush.
Bush announced a $1 billion aid package for Pakistan and praised Musharraf, the target of anti-war demonstrations at home. "
He is secure, and I think he has been a very, very effective leader," Secretary of State Colin Powell said Sunday on NBC's Meet the Press .
Bush tried to mollify both sides in the Middle East conflict.
In a reference to Palestinian-linked terrorism, he called for an end to "incitement, violence and terror," a statement applauded by Israel.
But he also called for creation of an independent Palestinian state.
Bush's words on the Mideast were significant.
The United States is "working toward the day when two states Israel and Palestine live peacefully together within secure and recognized borders as called for by the Security Council resolutions," he told the General Assembly.
Until Saturday, US presidents had referred to a "Palestinian state," but none had ever used the name "Palestine" except in reference to the British-controlled territory that existed before Israel was established in 1948.
For Israel, the name raises concerns that it implies a Palestinian right to all the pre-1948 territory, including Israel.
French Foreign Minister Hubert Vedrine praised Bush for the mention but criticized him for not making time to meet Arafat. "
On the Middle East, I'm sorry to see there is a missed opportunity on both the human and the political level," Vedrine said.
Powell was to meet with Arafat later Sunday.
Bush meets in Washington today with former South African president Nelson Mandela.
The volleys come on the eve of unusual dual-track court hearings to determine how to punish Microsoft after last year's appeals court ruling that the firm illegally protected its Windows monopoly.
In a hearing Wednesday, Microsoft and the Justice Department will make the case that their proposed deal is in the public interest.
Several industry groups are slated to oppose it.
The deal would require Microsoft to let PC makers more easily promote non-Microsoft products and disclose Windows' code to ensure rival software works well with the dominant operating system.
Nine other states joined the pact.
Then, in a trial to start Monday, the nine dissenting states and the District of Columbia will argue for tougher sanctions, such as more code disclosure.
They also want a Windows version from which the browser, media player or other features can be removed.
In court papers Friday, Microsoft said it would scuttle Windows XP and Windows 2000 under such a scenario.
The states, in turn, said in a filing that Microsoft need only produce one "modular" Windows version from which PC makers could remove add-ons.
Despite Microsoft claims that the mandates would doom Windows, "I think they would have to bring out a product," says analyst Rob Enderle of Giga Information Group.
"They can't walk away from Windows."
But in pretrial testimony released Monday, Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer said there is no demand for a stripped-down Windows.
He said it's a plot by rivals to "torture Microsoft."
Various features, he said, share software code.
"If you pull out a piece, it won't run."
Still, Microsoft executive Jim Allchin said in a deposition that Windows sports "chunks of functionality" that can be interchanged.
Also, in legal filings, the states said its key witnesses, Anthony Fama of Gateway and Larry Pearson of SBC Communications, will testify that tougher remedies are needed to stop Microsoft from rewarding PC makers that favor its products.
And Palm's Michael Mace and Novell's Carl Ledbetter will testify that Microsoft can prevent or has prevented rival handheld devices or server products from working well with Windows.
Meanwhile, a long list of Microsoft executives, possibly including Chairman Bill Gates, will describe the havoc the states' proposal would wreak on Microsoft.
Consumers, drawn by favorable financing and heavy discounting, boosted retail sales in October by 7.1%, the biggest one-month gain ever recorded.
The jump in sales at the nation's retail stores came after consumers cut back on their spending in September, pushing sales down 2.2%, the Commerce Department reported Wednesday.
Much of the strength came from a record 26.4% increase in car sales, which have been boosted by zero-percent financing and other incentives.
That follows a 4.5% decline in September.
Excluding autos, retail sales rose 1.0% in October. 
Consumers, whose spending accounts for two-thirds of all economic activity, have been a main force keeping the economy out of recession.
But economic fallout from the Sept. 11 terror attacks have probably made a recession this year unavoidable, economists say.
In an effort to prevent the economy from sinking deeper into recession, the Federal Reserve has cut interest rates 10 times this year, with three of the reductions coming after the attacks.
Congress, meanwhile, is working on a plan to stimulate the economy through new tax cuts and increased government spending.
The economy shrank at a 0.4% rate in the third quarter and many economists are predicting an even bigger drop in the current quarter, thus meeting a common definition of a recession: two consecutive quarters of declining economic output.
With unemployment rising and fears about anthrax in the mail and further terror attacks, economists worry that consumers might pull back, making the economy even weaker.
To revive sagging sales, retailers have heavily discounted merchandise and offered other incentives.
Car makers and dealers have provided free financing, which was a big factor in soaring car sales last month, economists say.
Sales at clothing stores increased 6.9%, erasing a 5.9% drop in September.
At building and garden supply stores, sales jumped 2.8% in October, after falling 2.6%. 
At health and beauty stores, sales rose 1.7%, after a 0.3% rise.
Sales of sporting goods, books and music rose 3%, following a 2.2% decline. 
Sales of electronics and appliances rose 0.7%, after a 1.4% drop.
Bar and restaurant sales grew 1.4%, after falling 2.5%.
Sales at furniture and home furnishing stores, however declined by 0.5%, after an even bigger 4.2% decrease. 
Lower pump prices sent sales at gasoline stations down 6.4%, following a 2.8% increase.
The 7.1% increase in total retail sales in October was the largest since the government began keeping retail sales records under the current classification system in 1992.
Last week, the nation's biggest retailers reported generally disappointing sales.
But discounters and other value-oriented stores continued to be the beneficiaries of consumers' frugality.
Copyright 2001
The Associated Press.
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
Va. (AP)
The first U.S. aircraft carrier to report for combat duty in the war on terrorism had a very different agenda before Sept. 11 a peaceful trip home from the Middle East.
"We were ready to go home, but (terrorist Osama) bin Laden had a different plan for us," said Raymond Torres, a machinist mate aboard the USS Enterprise.
The carrier became a base for launching the earliest air strikes against Afghanistan, with its planes dropping 862,000 pounds of munitions during two weeks in October.
On Saturday, the Enterprise made its delayed homecoming at Norfolk, Va.
The 5,000 sailors on board the carrier, which had its mission extended by nearly a month, had been anxious to see their home port and were proud of what they had accomplished.
"Our bombs-on-target rate was better than any recent conflict," said Lt. Cmdr.
Scott Harrill, an F/A-18 pilot from Westford, Mass.
"It was a complete team effort."
The Enterprise crew has an average age of 19.50, but Enterprise Capt.
James A. "Sandy" Winnefeld Jr. said his sailors performed like veterans.
"We actually had a lot of seasoning.
We were toward the end of our deployment, we had already performed operations in Iraq, so we were really at the top of our game," Winnefeld said.
"If you've lost faith in the youth of America, this is the place to come and regain it."
The campaign felt different from combat missions of the past, said Lt. Cmdr.
Scott Cohen, a supply officer from New York.
"Everything else Desert Shield, Bosnia it was always someone else who had been attacked," Cohen said.
"This was an attack on the U.S.
It drove home a lot more the importance of what we're doing."
Torres and the other ordnance workers took pleasure in scrawling messages on the bombs to be dropped, phrases like "bin Laden or Bust" and "Hijack This."
Even Winnefeld got into the act, writing FDNY, NYPD and Pentagon on some of the first bombs to be dropped.
Airman Jeremie Light, who armed bombs before fighter jets carried them to their targets, couldn't help but think of the consequences of his work.
"How many people is this going to kill?
It's on your mind all the time," said Light, of Dixon Springs, Ill.
"But then you see the planes come back, and you see that the bombs were launched, and everybody's cheering.
"It's doing what's right for our country."
Dozens of aviators from the Enterprise flew home Friday, a day ahead of their carrier.
One of them, Navy Lt. Steve Wynfield, had dropped bombs on Afghanistan on Oct. 7, the first day of the attack and his first wedding anniversary.
He finally got to share an anniversary kiss with his wife, Holly, after he and 67 other fliers landed at Oceana Naval Air Station.
"It's incredible, it's amazing to be back," Wynfield, a radar intercept officer from Patuxent River, Md., said after hugging his wife.
Winnefeld said his sailors were happy to be heading home, but have some worries about returning to a nation that they hear described by media, friends and family as forever changed.
"In the final analysis, though, they're going to know they were in an important place at an important time
and they did their job honorably," he said.
Copyright 2001
The Associated Press.
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
It's a lot like losing your virginity, Mike Tyson told me Sunday morning.
There's the fear of the unknown, the insecurity and creeping self-doubt, the thought of trying to measure up to expectations, real or idealized.
"You're nervous and scared, but you want to do it," he said.
Lennox Lewis.
Trust us, when Tyson turns out the lights on the British heavyweight next spring, there won't be a lot of romance preceding it.
Tyson will have his way with a very technically flawed fighter, then drop him literally.
That isn't to say the stocky 35-year-old slugger won't be passionate; indeed, Iron Mike's lust for unmitigated ring violence will be the difference.
The fight for the undisputed world heavyweight championship won't necessarily be quick or easy.
Sooner or later, Tyson will catch up with his retreating, chess-playing, aristocratic adversary.
Everybody wants to go to heaven, the late Joe Louis used to say, but nobody wants to die.
Tyson will do anything to vanquish his nemesis in dreadlocks.
Hard-core rage and mercilessness will overcome instinctive hesitancy and increasingly unsteady legs.
"I'm going in for the kill
I'm going to give it my all," Tyson said from Phoenix, where he's working out for a January tune-up against Ray Mercer, a bout that may be in doubt now that an agreement for a Lewis-Tyson fight appears imminent.
Lewis-Tyson is the only fight in boxing that has mattered for more than 2 years.
It appears as if a deal will be finalized in the next few weeks for a record-setting mega bout.
Premium cable TV channels Home Box Office and Showtime have stopped bickering about pay-per-view rights.
Controversial promoter Don King, being sued by Tyson for alleged financial shenanigans, is out of the way.
"He'll be on the sideline watching me break records and jaws," Tyson said.
"Don's a wretched fiend.
This will be my first truly liberated fight.
You know what it makes me feel like?
Like I lived through reconstruction.
I feel emancipated.
It's a shame
I lived so much of my life like a slave without knowing it.
"
All of this, of course, is contingent upon Mr. Tyson staying out of serious trouble.
Ring inactivity leads to boredom, which sometimes leads to allegations by women.
Tyson's biggest fight in life remains not the men who stand up against him in the ring, but the person standing in front of the mirror.
"About a year ago, I was psychologically jacked up.
I'm so proud
I didn't kill anybody," he said.
"I never thought I'd come this far.
I was looking for a new profession.
I'm serious, man.
Music, anything.
I was almost getting ready to kill people for money.
After my friend Darryl died, I got perspective.
I realized things were serious out there.
It was then that I realized I really didn't want to die, that I wanted to make something of myself."
No one should make too much out of what happened Saturday night.
No matter how devastating Lewis was with his one-punch KO of glorified club fighter Hasim Rahman, the titles were on loan since the Baltimorean hit the lotto in South Africa in April.
After watching the fight on television, Tyson phoned a friend and remarked, "Lennox better count his days because they're numbered.
"Rahman was intimidated and when you're intimidated, you can't perform," he said.
"He stood there like a deer in front of a truck.
When someone fights like that, you have to put a performance into perspective.
He didn't truly give it his all.
He didn't come in looking for a war.
I'm coming to make a war out of it."
Lewis has a little too much Gene Tunney in him.
He likes boxing, but he doesn't like fighting.
Tyson wings punches with homicidal intentions; Lewis fights as if he's maneuvering around a canvas chessboard.
You never can be sure which Lewis will show up.
It won't matter, provided Tyson is in peak physical condition, listens to his corner and fights in a disciplined manner with constant pressure designed to break down the body and spirit of the 36-year-old champion.
"My advantage over most guys I've fought is that I'm more emotionally stable," Tyson said.
"Professionally speaking, that is."
After all these years, we can't help but watch him, even as we try to look away.
Travelers taking their first plane trips in months will find a very different experience. 
Waits at security checkpoints may take from a couple of minutes to a couple of hours.
Nail clippers without attached blades are OK to bring aboard, but pocketknives aren't.
Only one carry-on bag is permitted, not two.
Meals on domestic flights have virtually disappeared.
Friends and family can't greet fliers in gate areas, because only ticket holders are allowed past security.
Thousands of parking spaces close to airport terminals stand empty because of new federal security rules.
Sharp cutbacks in airlines' schedules are requiring fliers to build more flexibility into their own.
About half of all domestic routes have fewer non-stop flights a day than they did before Sept. 11.
Roughly 4,500 flights 15% of the total are gone, according to a USA TODAY analysis of the airlines' November schedules now and before the attacks.
And that's not even taking into account the unexpected: bad weather that grounds planes or security breaches leading to terminal evacuations that could tie the retooled air system into knots.
"I'm not happy," says travel diehard Claire McFarlane, who is going from Lexington, Ky., to Oakland, "but I'm adjusting to a new world."
Airlines say they are preparing for the onslaught.
Southwest Airlines has put out a call for off-duty employees to work in terminals helping passengers.
Northwest Airlines is installing 25 new security checkpoints at its Minneapolis/St.
Paul, Detroit and Memphis hub airports and seven others.
United Airlines has added 14 security lanes at its Denver and Washington Dulles hubs and brought back 1,700 furloughed employees to help smooth passenger glitches at airports it serves.
Northwest is so confident that lines won't be snarled that executives shortened the recommended advance time for passengers to show up at the airport from 2 hours which is what most major carriers still advocate on domestic flights down to 90 minutes.
Then they cut it again, to 75 minutes.
"We're confident we'll be able to meet the needs of getting travelers through the airport efficiently during the holiday period," says Northwest spokesman Kurt Ebenhoch.
Still, travel agents say it might not be enough.
David Perelman, president of DMS Travel Group in New York, says he's telling his high-end clients to arrive up to 3 hours early.
Some regulars are calling off trips this year.
"It's going to be a nightmare," predicts Ronald Greisch, a sales manager who says he and his wife, Jennifer, will go next month instead.
"Are we going to subject ourselves to that mess just for 4 days?"
But others are enduring jitters and schedule changes to push ahead with trips.
Jerry and Jan Foster of Reston, Va., say recent schedule changes forced them to reshuffle their schedule for a Thanksgiving Day getaway to the Caribbean, weeks before they board the plane.
The trouble started when they discovered American Airlines dumped the flight they would normally catch from nearby Dulles International Airport.
The Fosters were able to rebook on an Air Jamaica flight, but it meant having to fly out of the more distant Baltimore/Washington International.
Then, they were advised to arrive 2 1/2 hours early for their 9:30 a.m. flight requiring them to shell out $39 for an airport hotel room the night before.
Monday's crash was another blow but not enough to deter them.
"I had so much anxiety when that plane went down, but I woke up today and realized today is all I have," Jan Foster says.
"I'm not going to stay home."
Flight cutbacks.
Many major airlines have cut their schedules by about 20% the past 2 months.
Some airports have seen even sharper cutbacks.
Raleigh/Durham, home of bankrupt Midway Airlines, is down 35%.
Reagan Washington National is down 57% from its pre-Sept. 11 schedule. 
As the airlines have pared flight schedules, travelers will have fewer choices on certain routes.
The 10 non-stops from Boston to San Francisco are now six.
Akron, Ohio, has lost its non-stop flights to Washington Dulles.
Rochester, Minn. no longer has non-stops to St. Louis.Schedule changes are forcing travelers in smaller cities to make extra stops or switch carriers to reach their destinations, especially if it's another small town.
For instance, fliers from Fargo, N.D., to Little Rock no longer have United's one-stop service through Chicago.
Now they must make two stops or more each way, including a possible change of airlines.
One of the shortest routings between Lake Charles, La., and Evansville, Ind., takes 6 hours and 10 minutes, and requires stops in Houston and Cincinnati and a change of airlines from Continental to Delta.
Forced rebookings.
Fliers who booked ahead might get tossed off their preferred flight, often with little warning, because airlines have dropped it from their schedule. 
Dick Kinney, a Milwaukee hotel franchising specialist, and his wife, Kay, in August booked a non-stop United flight from Chicago to Little Rock for Thanksgiving Day morning.
They found out the flight had been canceled when Dick called Sept. 14 to check on it.
A reservations agent told him the couple would have to make two stops, including a change of planes, that would have made them too late to have holiday dinner with his elderly parents.
He says they got a refund from United and found a more convenient flight on Northwest.
Tighter air port parking.
Security directives have forced some airports to empty hundreds of close-in parking spaces, which are needed most during the holidays. 
At Denver International, 1,800 of the 13,000 garage spaces can't be used.
At San Francisco International, 1,000 of 5,500 close-in spaces are off-limits.
At Dallas/Fort Worth, 2,700 parking spaces were lost from among 16,000 close-in spots.
Curbside passenger drop-offs and pickups still aren't allowed from private vehicles at Los Angeles International, but parking is available in the Central Terminal area, which was closed in the aftermath of Sept. 11.
Long lines at security checkpoints.
Airlines, which currently run security in airport terminals they control, say they'll open as many lanes as possible to minimize delays.
But some airline executives worry that a crush of holiday travelers unaware of new rules might create bottlenecks. 
Volunteer "ambassadors" at Dallas/
Fort Worth International will be scouting for passengers held up in the longest lines at the airport's 17 security checkpoints and directing them to less crowded ones.
The airport says checkpoint lines haven't been a problem.
In a recent survey of 100 travelers, 94 said the security line wait time was less than 10 minutes.
If snafus occur, airline officials say they think they will be able to cope with them despite the announced layoffs of about 80,000 employees across the industry since Sept. 11. "
The level of customer service will be higher as a result of the tragedy of Sept. 11," predicts Scott Kirby, executive vice president of America West Airlines.
"Our employees have much higher morale and have banded together because the industry is in such difficult straits," he says.
Besides, he says, the reduction in flights has helped smooth some flight delays and cancellations that were the oft-voiced complaints about airlines before the terrorist attacks, he says.
Passengers apparently are expecting inconveniences.
An Accenture survey finds 28% of those who canceled holiday flights cited long lines at the airport as a reason.
Still, the survey of 2,764 travelers found that eight of 10 are still planning to go ahead with trips.
Ralph Obenauf and his wife, Joanne, are going ahead with their Thanksgiving trip to Aruba.
But it hasn't been easy.
The Bridgewater, N.J., couple booked a flight 8 months ago on Continental Airlines to spend the Thanksgiving holiday at their time-share condo.
On Nov. 3, Ralph was informed the flights to the island and back were canceled, and the airline was unable to rebook them on the same travel date.
They'll have to fly out a day earlier than planned, requiring they spend the night in a hotel.
And they'll have to fly back a day early, costing them a night in their condo.
But the Obenaufs are determined.
"Who knows what tomorrow will bring?
It's a different world now," Ralph Obenauf says.
"But it won't (keep) me from that beach in Aruba."
Most stem cells mixed with mouse cells in lab WASHINGTON, Aug. 24 (UPI) --
Many or perhaps all of the embryonic stem cells approved for research funding by the Bush administration were mixed in the laboratory with mouse cells and "may create substantial hurdles" for scientists hoping to use the colonies in the search for cures for Parkinson's disease and other ailments, The Washington Post reported Friday.
The stem cell lines were originally created for early stage research "with no thought they would become the only embryonic cells eligible for federal money," according to The Post.
Extracting human cells from an embryo and placing them atop mouse cells is a standard technique for creating human embryonic stem cell lines.
However, though the mouse "feeder" cells excrete unknown nutritional or growth factor that helps the human cells stay healthy, they may also pose a small risk of "transferring potentially deadly animal viruses into people," The Post reported.
Also, inserting theses embryonic cells into people would be considered "xenotransplants," transplants of animal tissue.
Under Food and Drug Administration guidelines, it would be difficult, but not impossible, to use the cells in human clinical tests.
"The human embryonic stem cell lines reported in scientific literature were all grown in direct contact with mouse cells and might have picked up mouse viruses, which the government officials acknowledged will bring them under FDA policy," The Post added.
Patient groups and those who work with the stem cells have expressed concern about the possible restrictions.
"This would be the exclamation point" on an already lengthy list of questions about the quantity and quality of the cell lines eligible for research funding under the Bush policy, said Kevin Ryder, a consultant to the American Cell Therapy Research Foundation, reported The Post.
--
Copyright 2001 by United Press International.
All rights reserved. --
For Heather Mercer, the scene of U.S. helicopters swooping into a field in Afghanistan to whisk her and seven others to freedom seemed like something out of a movie.
Mercer said she and her seven fellow aid workers from Shelter Now International watched in fear from their jail cells in Kabul as Taliban forces fled the city under attack by Northern Alliance forces.
Mercer said she thought Taliban authorities had abandoned them as silence fell over the city.
But the moment of calm was broken by the sounds of soldiers at the prison door.
But instead of executing the prisoners, Taliban fighters scooped up the group and rejoined the retreat toward Kandahar, a Taliban stronghold city south of Kabul.
But the Taliban commander in charge of the prisoners had a change of heart, Mercer said, and decided to leave the group behind near the Afghan city of Ghazni, where three U.S. Special Forces helicopters picked them up in the early hours of Thursday.
The Taliban arrested eight workers of Shelter Now International in August for promoting Christianity in Afghanistan.
The charge carried the death sentence, but the Taliban had at the time said the Westerners -? four Germans, two Americans and two Australians -? would be given a reduced sentence.
During their raid on the Shelter Now compound in Kabul on Aug. 4, the Taliban also arrested 16 of the organization?s Afghan helpers and then held them separately.
Their fate is unknown.
At the time of their arrests, the Taliban showed the media what it called evidence of the aid workers?
guilt.
It said computer disks containing the story of the life of Christ in the local Dari language, a copy of the Bible in English and Dari, and a book on Christianity had been seized at a house where the workers were accused of promoting Christianity.
Asked if the charges were true, aid worker Peter Bunch said, ?
We?re not stupid.?
The freed prisoners are Americans Mercer and Dana Curry; Australians Bunch and Thomas; and Germans Magrit Strebnar, Kati Jelinek, Silke Duerrkopf and Georg Taubmann, who is the head of Shelter Now.
Copyright 2001 by United Press International.
All rights reserved.
As the last internationally recognized president of Afghanistan returned to Kabul this weekend, top U.S. officials were publicly urging the Northern Alliance to accept a broad based Afghan government.
Speaking on NBC's Meet The Press, the President's National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice said, "The nature of this government is going to be up to the Afghan people."
She said that U.S. officials had been in touch with Burhanuddin Rabbani, who returned to Kabul Saturday from exile and proclaimed himself President of Afghanistan following the city?s capture by the anti-Taliban Northern Alliance.
While Rabbani's government occupies Afghanistan's seat at the United Nations, the U.N. Security Council this week passed a resolution calling on all parties to cooperate with the body to form a broader based government.
"We've been in touch with elements of the Northern Alliance.
We've been in touch with a number of Pashtun leaders, and everybody I think understands that the future of Afghanistan has to be one in which all elements are represented," Rice said.
Most of the diplomatic effort for the United States is working through James Dobbins, a former Balkan envoy, who met this week with local Pashtun leaders in Afghanistan?s neighbor Pakistan.
Pashtuns are the largest ethnic group in Afghanistan, and many live in Pakistan, too.
The Northern Alliance is a fractious coalition of local warlords dominated by the country?s three largest minorities ?
Tajiks, Uzbeks and Hazaras.
They enjoy little support from the Pashtuns, who dominate in the South of Afghanistan and formed the demographic basis for the Taliban.
Secretary of State Colin Powell told ABC?s This Week Sunday ? referring to Dobbin's meeting with Abdullah Abdullah, the Northern Alliance Foreign Minister ? ?
Mr. Abdullah has agreed on behalf of the Northern Alliance to send Northern Alliance representatives to a meeting that's being convened by Mr. (Lakhdar) Brahimi, the Secretary-General of the United Nations' representative on these matters."
That meeting may take place as soon as this week, possibly in the United Arab Emirates, Geneva or a third location according to State Department officials.
Abdullah himself cited Austria and Germany as possible venues and said a decision would be taken within the next three days.
"The victories and liberation of areas by our armed forces shouldn't affect our commitment to the formation of a fully representative, multi-ethnic broad-based government, but it will rather encourage us to speed up our efforts with our national, regional and international partners in order to achieve that," Abdullah told reporters in Tashkent Sunday morning.
But in the meantime, Rabanni has occupied Kabul?s presidential residence ?
the so-called Palace Number One ? and a high level Russian delegation, headed by President Vladimir Putin?s special envoy Aleksandr Oblov was in Kabul Sunday to meet with him.
The de facto establishment of a Rabbani government may complicate U.S. efforts to persuade the Northern Alliance to cede control eventually to a broader Afghan government.
And Brahimi's work to bring together the various Afghan factions -- including the Northern Alliance ? will not be easy.
Already the alliance representative at the U.N. has been quoted by Pakistan?s Daily Jang as saying they would not work with Pashtun warlord Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, reported to have returned to Afghanistan this weekend.
But U.S. diplomats have another card to play if talks do not work out.
On Tuesday, U.S. and Japanese officials will host the first conference on developing an international relief plan for Afghanistan.
Christina Rocca, the assistant secretary of state for South Asian affairs, told reporters Thursday, "One of the things, we have going for us is that we are putting together an international reconstruction effort, and we hope that will serve as an incentive to participate in a broad-based government."
The new committee will include representatives from Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Turkey and the United Kingdom.
Qatar will help in its capacity as head of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and Norway as the next head of the U.N. working group on Afghanistan.
In addition, the Asia Development Bank, the World Bank and the Islamic Development Bank are expected to attend Tuesday's meeting.
State Department officials say the new effort will at first focus on immediate development needs such as water supplies, hospitals and ridding the country of its many land mines.
Later on however, the fund could end up financing the building of roads and other forms of infrastructure, something particularly important for oil companies that have longed looked to Afghanistan as an ideal location for a central Asian pipeline.
Copyright 2001 by United Press International.
All rights reserved.
California Gov. Gray Davis said he erred on the side of caution by publicly announcing a potential threat to four major bridges used by thousands of California commuters even though some irritated federal officials characterized the information as largely uncorroborated.
Davis used a relatively routine news conference in Los Angeles on Thursday to reveal that the FBI and other law enforcement agencies had found credible evidence that terrorists planned to attack a bridge in the Golden State during rush hour sometime between Friday and next Wednesday.
Officials with the FBI and Justice Department hurriedly downplayed the significance of the information that had been originally sent out only as a confidential advisory to law enforcement agencies, and were cool to Davis' actions.
"Obviously, Gov. Davis thought that one thing that he could do to enhance the security of people using those bridges was to make a public announcement," Tom Ridge, the head of the federal Office of Homeland Security, told reporters Friday in Washington.
"We did not encourage him to do so."
Although other Western governors and various California city officials chose not to release the information to the public, Davis said the buck stopped with him in terms of safeguarding the lives of commuters and the bridges themselves.
"If I didn't make that statement, and God forbid, something happened, I'd be kicking myself," Davis said on "Larry King Live" on Thursday night.
"I have an obligation to share with the people of this state information that may well be credible that affects their lives.
More importantly, I want them to know that we have gone the extra mile to protect them."
Security had been tightened immediately after Sept. 11 around the bridges and remained so on Friday.
Traffic volumes were described as fairly normal on the Golden Gate and Bay Bridge in San Francisco, the Coronado Bay Bridge in San Diego, and the Vincent Thomas Bridge in Los Angeles.
Security was also on high alert around bridges in Washington state and other Western states as well.
Davis told King that he had discussed the FBI warning with his staff and decided that the information was solid enough to warrant alerting motorists who use the bridges.
He conceded that the warning could easily be a false alarm, but he did not want to take any chances.
"You get this information every day and you don't know if it is disinformation just to make you scurry about and take a lot of precautions that turn out not to be necessary, but you have to err on the side of caution," said Davis.
"You have to do everything you can to protect people, and then if the threat turns out to be false, fine."
Davis has locked horns with the Bush administration before by refusing to go along with the White House's strategy of allowing market forces to cool off the runaway electricity market in his state a year ago.
David had demanded federal price controls, which the White House does not support.
Copyright 2001 by United Press International.
All rights reserved.
Content: 02000000 03010000 04015000 11004000 16001000
Abdullah told journalists during a joint news conference with the U.S. special envoy to the anti-Taliban forces, James Dobbins, in the Uzbek capital of Tashkent that less than 100 British soldiers were at the Bagram airbase North of Kabul "to provide security for humanitarian aid."
He also said that a United Nations sponsored meeting to discuss the formation of a broad-based Afghan government would likely take place within a week.
Dobbins arrived in Uzbekistan this weekend from Pakistan where he conducted talks with representatives of other anti-Taliban groups.
Abdullah flew to Tashkent to meet him from the Afghan capital Kabul, where -- despite concern from the international community -- the Northern Alliance appears to be establishing a government.
The alliance -- a fractious coalition of ethnic groups and local warlords -- represents the government of President Burhanuddin Rabbani, who returned to Kabul Saturday.
The alliance has very little support among Afghanistan's largest ethnic group, the Pashtuns, who dominate the South of the country.
But in the North, the alliance has occupied almost all but one of the towns once controlled by the Taliban.
Rabbani's tenure in power during the early 1990's was widely considered a disaster -- a civil war killed tens of thousands of Afghans, reduced many cities to rubble and paved the way for rule of the Taliban militia.
Over the past few days, leaders of the Northern Alliance have voiced disquiet at the deployment of foreign troops in the areas of Afghanistan they control.
"If we're talking about thousands of fighting forces from outside Afghanistan, this is a major issue that has to be discussed," Abdullah said Saturday in Kabul.
However, Sunday he made it clear that the Alliance had agreed the deployment at Bagram with the British government.
"We are in the picture and in full agreement," he said.
Since Thursday, a force of about 100 British troops -- accompanied, according to the Washington Post, by 60 U.S. special operations forces in civilian clothes -- have been preparing the airbase to receive humanitarian and diplomatic flights, like the one which brought U.N. negotiator Fransesc Vendrell and his team to Kabul on Saturday.
Abdullah also said a U.N.-sponsored meeting to discuss the creation of a broad-based Afghan government could happen within a week.
"The victories and liberation of areas by our armed forces shouldn't affect our commitment to the formation of a fully representative, multi-ethnic broad-based government, but it will rather encourage us to speed up our efforts with our national, regional and international partners in order to achieve that," Abdullah said.
He added that the venue for the meeting still had to be decided, but that Germany, Geneva in Switzerland and Vienna in Austria would be acceptable to the alliance and that a decision should be made within the next two or three days.
According to Abdullah, there are several Pashtun leaders who could play a role in pacification.
Earlier this week Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostum, one of the leaders of the Northern Alliance, who controls the region around and in the city of Mazar-i-Sharif told the Uzbek television first channel in the course of a telephone interview that the future Afghan government must voice interests of all ethnic groups residing in Afghanistan and establish "fundamentals of democracy."
Copyright 2001 by United Press International.
All rights reserved.
Feature:
The Singapore-China connection By SONIA JESSOP, Special to UPI SINGAPORE, Aug. 24
(UPI) --
Singapore needs to tap the opportunities of the expanding Chinese market.
This is an increasing necessity as China readies itself to entering the World Trade Organization in November, and because China's cross-strait trade with Taiwan could soon improve dramatically.
The double concern for the Singaporean government is that the emergence of the Chinese economic powerhouse is directly impacting its export performance at a time when the country is already in recession, and that it is also likely to pull investments from multinational companies away from Singapore toward a cheaper labor market.
In the short-term, Singapore retains a comparative advantage as China builds the required infrastructure and business environment.
But this advantage will disappear over time.
In his recent "Address to the Nation," Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong warned of the serious economic threat China represented as it emerges as a manufacturing powerhouse.
"I have seen China's transformation at close quarters.
It is scary," he said.
"Our biggest challenge is, therefore, to secure a niche for ourselves as China swamps the world with her high-quality but cheaper products."
Earlier this month, Deputy Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong also warned of the "near-term pain" China's economic rise would bring to Singapore and the rest of Asia.
Asian countries, particularly those heavily dependent on the information-technology (IT) market, are already "feeling the heat," he said.
A cornerstone of Singapore's success in the last two decades has been its export of electronic components to the U.S. market.
But since 1997, Singapore's share of the U.S. electronic market has been steadily falling to the benefit of China, whose share has now overtaken Singapore's.
Lee also noted that 70 percent of foreign direct investment in the region was now being channeled into China and its Special Administrative Region of Hong Kong.
An economic survey released this month by the Ministry of Trade and Industry, also warned that if the economic integration between Taiwan and China becomes a reality, Singapore's exports -- especially electronics -- may lose competitiveness in the global market as Taiwanese firms are able to produce the components at a lower cost in China.
The Taiwanese government has recently indicated its willingness to abandon its "go slow, be patient" policy in favor of a policy of "active opening and effective management" when it comes down to business relations with China.
The new initiative would cover key fields related to investment restrictions, direct trade, direct links, direct banking transactions, inward investment from China and return of investment profits from China.
The MTI survey showed that such drastic shift in policy would have an economic impact for Singapore.
The profiles of Singapore and Taiwan exports to China are similar.
Machinery exports makes up 42 percent of Taiwan's total exports to China, while it is about 58 per cent of Singapore 's total exports to China.
Meanwhile, as low-end production continues to migrate to the mainland, Taiwan would be forced to move away from manufacturing to services and intellectual properties, and move up higher in the value chain in order to survive.
This would put it in direct competition with Singapore.
While aware of the economic threat China represents, the Singaporean government has clearly indicated it wants to make the best of what could be a great opportunity in the longer-term for Singapore, mainly a bigger market to which it can export its goods.
Economic relations between both countries have expanded significantly in the last decade.
Closer linkages, especially in the electronics and oil refinery industries, have enabled bilateral trade to register strong growth, and more can be done.
China is currently Singapore's seventh-largest trading partner.
According to statistics from the MTI, bilateral trade has grown at a rate of 15 percent per annum in the last decade, reaching an all-time high of U.S. $12.5 billion last year.
Between 1990-2000, exports to China rose by 20 percent per annum, while imports increased by 13 percent.
The pattern of trade has altered dramatically in the past decade, going from mainly commodities and primary products to electronics and machinery.
Though on the decline, oil trade continues to have a significant contribution to bilateral trade, and given Singapore's position as a regional refinery hub, oil trade should continue to exert significant influence over bilateral trade.
The rapid expansion of bilateral trade was partly the result of an increase in Singapore's FDI to China.
In 1997,China overtook Malaysia to become Singapore's top investment destination in cumulative terms.
Singapore is now the fifth-largest foreign investor in China.
However, FDI into China reached a peak in 1995 prior to the Asian financial crisis in 1997-1998 and has yet to recover convincingly.
According to recent figures released by China's Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation, Singapore's new investments in China slipped 5.6 percent to just $978 million in the first half of this year.
This raised the it's total investments to date to nearly $18 billion.
Manufacturing and real estate attracted the bulk of Singaporean investments in China.
Earlier this week, a business delegation lead by Singapore Trade and Industry Minister George Yeo left for an intensive tour of China to scout out potential investment opportunities.
--
Copyright 2001 by United Press International.
All rights reserved. --
Anthrax case confirmed in Florida By NICHOLAS M. HORROCK and DEE ANN DIVIS WASHINGTON, Oct. 4 (UPI) --
The head of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services announced Wednesday that a 63-year-old Lantana, Fla., man has been diagnosed with pulmonary anthrax, but he said the case was isolated and not believed to be connected to a biological terrorist incident.
Anthrax is a naturally occurring disease that can be contracted through the skin, inhalation, and gastrointestinally.
The vast majority of cases arise when people with cuts or abrasions on their hands handle infected animal products.
But governments and individuals have produced anthrax as a possible biological weapon, and the United States has been on heightened alert for its use by terrorists since the Sept. 11 attacks in New York and Washington.
In a White House briefing set up to assuage public anxiety, Health and Human Services Secretary Tommy Thompson said the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta had confirmed Thursday that a man stricken on Oct. 2 had anthrax.
"People need to understand that our public health system is on heightened alert, so we may have more public reports on what appear to be isolated cases.
It appears that this is an isolated case," Thompson said.
Tim O'Connor, spokesman for the Palm Beach County Florida Public Health Department, told United Press International that the man was admitted to the John F. Kennedy Medical Center in Atlantis, Fla., at 2:30 a.m. on Tuesday.
He was vomiting, having seizures and running a very high fever.
Physicians suspected spinal meningitis and gave the man a spinal tap and noted "rod-shaped bacillus."
They sent their findings to the Florida State Health Department in Jacksonville, where a preliminary diagnosis of "bacillus anthracis," the scientific name for anthrax, was made on Wednesday, and the CDC confirmed anthrax Thursday.
The man, Bob Stevens, is an employee of American Media Inc., which publishes the National Enquirer.
He was unconscious and in critical condition at Kennedy Medical Center.
Stevens contracted anthrax through inhalation -- a type of infection that is usually fatal, the CDC said.
In a statement, American Media said: "Doctors and investigators are working to determine how Stevens, an avid outdoorsman, contracted the disease.
He had been out of the office since Sept. 26th."
Thompson said in his White House briefing that Stevens had traveled to North Carolina and returned to Florida in the period since that date.
"We've also dispatched people from CDC to North Carolina, to the communities that he was there," he said.
"We're checking with his neighbors.
We're investigating with the FBI all known places and all the things that he might have ingested."
Thompson said the man had been drinking from a stream, but he did not know whether it was factor.
"I want to make sure everybody understands that anthrax is not contagious and it's not communicable, which means it is not spread from person to person," Thompson said.
He said there were adequate supplies of antibiotics to treat 2,000,000 cases for 60 days.
"There is enough available, we have an ample supply," he said.
In the past two weeks, concern over anthrax has caused people to buy antibiotics and gas masks, but experts have said gas masks are not an effective protection and that antibiotics can't be taken in advance.
New York Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, on a tour of the World Trade Center rubble with Mexican President Vicente Fox, stopped to tell reporters Thursday that he had talked with the health secretary by telephone about the Florida anthrax patient.
"It appears to be an isolated case," the mayor said.
"There is no evidence at this point, of any anthrax in New York City or this area.
We've been in constant surveillance.
We've gotten a lot of calls about this.
The people in New York and elsewhere throughout the country should not be concerned about it.
We continue to monitor hospitals and numerous 911 calls."
Neil Cohen, New York City health commissioner, said city hospitals were on the alert for any possible anthrax cases, said, "All the early warning systems are in place."
(With reporting by William M. Reilly in New York)
-- Copyright 2001 by United Press International.
All rights reserved. --
Iraq, Jordan to discuss trade expansion BAGHDAD, Iraq, Aug. 24 (UPI) --
A Jordanian ministerial delegation traveled to Baghdad Friday for talks with the Iraqi officials meant to reactivate a $450 million trade protocol agreement and expand economic and trade cooperation.
The delegation includes the ministers of trade and industry, energy, agriculture, transportation and health as well as a number of businessmen.
Jordan's Minister of Trade and Industry Wassef Azar said his country's ties with Iraq were "historical and strategic" and welcomed improved Iraqi relations with a number of Arab countries, especially Syria.
Azar said the team's visit to Baghdad meant to "lay bases for strategic ties between the two countries" and said there were no obstacles for moving ahead with a project for transporting Iraqi crude oil to Jordan via a pipeline.
Iraqi Trade Minister Mohammed Mehdi Saleh said the visit expressed "the joint wish to consolidate cooperation between the two countries."
Saleh noted that Jordan ranks fourth on the list of 75 states benefiting from trade deals with Iraq in line with the 1996 U.N. oil-for-food program and hoped "it would become a main trade partner to Iraq."
The Jordanian delegation was to discuss during its four-day visit to Baghdad ways to expand trade cooperation and increase Jordanian exports as part of their $450 million protocol agreement and the oil-for-food program.
Last November, Iraq and Jordan agreed to increase their protocol accord from $300 million to $450 million and raise Jordan's exports from Iraqi oil to 5 million tons annually, half of which is for free.
Iraq has promised Jordan and three other countries, Turkey, Syria and Russia, to have priority in concluding trade deals under the oil-for-food program.
--
Copyright 2001 by United Press International.
All rights reserved. --
Arafat in Beijing to meet Chinese leaders By KIRK TROY BEIJING, Aug. 24 (UPI) -- Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat was to meet Chinese President Jiang Zemin later Friday in an effort to muster further international support for the Palestinians in the ongoing crisis in the Middle East.
Arafat arrived in the Chinese capital late Thursday after whirlwind stops in India and Pakistan where he also briefed leaders on the situation back home. "
The main objective of President Arafat's visit to China is to consult with Chinese leaders concerning the Israeli aggression in Palestine," Arafat spokesman Nabil Abu Rudeina told reporters Friday.
China, a long time supporter of the Palestinian cause, is expected to fully back moves by the Palestinians to solve the crisis, including once again throwing its diplomatic weight behind a plan that would provide for international observers.
Beijing has long maintained close ties with the Palestinians but in recent years has forged a broadening commercial and military relationship with Israel, which has included a significant number of high-tech arms deals.
China has often given Israel the cold shoulder this year following the cancellation of a deal to sell Beijing an advanced radar system after considerable pressure from Washington. "
The Chinese government has repeatedly called for restraint of the maximum from both Israel and Palestine, and especially Israel, and urged the two sides to resume negotiations," a statement from China's Foreign Ministry released by state run media said.
Beijing established ties with the Palestinian Authority in 1988, the first member of the UN Security Council to do so, and is seen as a main diplomatic supporter of the Palestinians on the world stage.
--
Copyright 2001 by United Press International.
All rights reserved. --
Pupils back to school amid violence By SAUD ABU RAMADAN GAZA, Sept. 1 (UPI) -- More than one million Palestinian schoolboys and girls started back to schools Saturday while violence and bloodshed between Israel and the Palestinians flares all over Gaza and the West Bank.
The Palestinian ministry of education said in a statement that Palestinian children are back to start a new school year in an atmosphere of violence, closures, tanks incursions, shelling and parents fears for their children's lives.
The education department director-general, Naeem Abu El Homos, told Palestinian radio that 140 schoolboys had been killed and more than 2,000 injured over summer vacation. "
Our pupils' lives are in danger, especially with the continuation of the Israeli shelling of Palestinian areas by tanks and by F-16s and helicopters' missiles," Abu El Homos said.
He said that during the summer vacation, about 95 schools in Gaza and the West Bank were damaged either partially or severely when they were shelled by tanks missiles and calibers.
Abu El Homos spoke about the psychological impact on schoolboys who are back in schools and either homeless after Israeli soldiers destroyed their homes; orphans after Israeli troops killed their fathers or scared of being hurt.
He said Israeli troops had occupied three schools and turned them into military bases in the West Bank town of Hebron. "
Last year Israel closed down six schools and education was stopped in 66 schools as a result of the military siege and curfews imposed on several villages in the West Bank," said Abu El Homos.
In northern Gaza, as the pupils were on their way to Ibad El Rahman elementary school to start their first day school, they saw a car exploding just one block far from their school, its pieces thrown in the air.
One man was killed and two were injured.
The Palestinian security intelligence in Gaza said in a statement that Israel killed Col. Tayseer Khatab Saturday morning and wounded two people near El Rahman School by blowing up a bomb that was planted into his car.
The statement said that the bomb was blown up from a distance by a remote control killing Khatab, the bureau chief of General Amin El Hindi's office, head of the Palestinian intelligence security services.
Since the beginning of the Intifada 11 months ago, Israel has assassinated more than 60 Palestinian activists and militants in Gaza and the West Bank.
Israeli security officials claimed that they were masterminding attacks against Israel.
Meanwhile, Hundreds of Palestinians demonstrated in Gaza and the West Bank urging the U.N. World Conference against Racism held in South Africa to condemn the Israeli policy against the Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza.
Demonstrators took the streets in the West Bank town of Ramallah waving flags and holding pictures of Palestinian children were killed by Israel during eleven month of Israeli Palestinian fighting.
They shouted slogans said that Israel is a Zionist entity and said that Zionism is 100 percent equal to racism.
As soon as the demonstration reached the center of the town of Al Beereh near Ramallah, the demonstrators clashed with the Israeli troops.
Demonstrators threw stones and troops fired tear gas canisters and rubber-coated metal bullets.
Hospital officials said that at least nine Palestinians were shot and injured, including four children, adding that more than 32 demonstrators had breathing problems after inhaling tear gas.
--
Copyright 2001 by United Press International.
All rights reserved. --
The new Palestinian diplomatic representative in Arab East Jerusalem, Sari Nusseibeh, Tuesday suggested Palestinians hold a referendum over their 53-year-old demand to return to their old homes inside Israel proper.
The refugee issue has been one of the key hurdles -- possibly the main stumbling block -- to an Israeli-Palestinian agreement.
Nusseibeh advocated that the Palestinians reconsider their insistence on a "right of return" for all refugees who left their homes in the first Israel-Arab war of 1948-49.
According to U.N. figures, there are more than 3.5 million refugees.
Israel has refused to let them back, arguing such a return would destroy their state since the Jews would become a minority.
The refugee issue and the future of Jerusalem were two key issues over which the Israeli-Palestinian talks failed in January.
Addressing the Foreign Press Association in Jerusalem, Tuesday, Nusseibeh noted Israel would not accept "the return of 4 million refugees within its borders."
The issue should now be discussed within Palestinian camp, he said.
"This is a Palestinian issue."
Though a senior Palestinian official, Nusseibeh -- who has occasionally veered from official Palestinian Authority lines -- said he was expressing his own views.
He said he considered his primary role as "not that of a politician" but a teacher who should "think critically."
He is also president of the al Quds University.
"I would like to think of myself as being close to Arafat," he said of the Palestinian leader.
However that has nothing to do with his right to speak his mind, he added.
"He (Arafat) gave me a commission to look after the political side of Jerusalem (affairs).
If he wishes to he can dismiss me," Nusseibeh said.
He confirmed Palestinians were "very angry with me" over his argument about the "right of return."
There have been petitions to cancel his new diplomatic appointment but "nothing more serious" such as threats to attack him.
Defending his position, Nusseibeh said: "I am not the cause of this reality.
I am expressing this reality."
In an attempt to resolve the refugee issue, he advocated a referendum among Palestinian on "where we should go.
" All Palestinians, living in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and other countries should have a right to vote, he said.
Nusseibeh suggested the Israelis and Palestinians "try to define the principles of the end game for both sides" and then take gradual steps toward reaching the shared vision.
That track might be more successful than the present practice of going step by step in the hope of eventually reaching a still undefined overall agreement.
He criticized both sides for making mistakes in the 13 months of the intifada. "
Perhaps reason was not playing a dominant role, especially in the past year," he said.
He was steadfast in insisting Israel withdraw from all the territories it occupied in the 1967 war, including East Jerusalem.
Noting the city is holy to the three monotheistic faiths he said, "If we try to lay exclusive claims, reject each other's emotions and feelings, we would not be true to our own faiths."
However, he would not compromise on the Haram e-Sharif Muslim religious complex, which sits on what the Jews call the Temple Mount.
The area is holy to both Jews and Muslims.
Copyright 2001 by United Press International.
All rights reserved.
The head of the once-mighty energy trading company Enron Corp. admitted Wednesday that the company had made some "very bad" investment decisions in the past, as it continues to push through the buyout deal by Dynegy Inc.
But whether Enron President Ken Lay's mea culpa is strong enough for him to forfeit a tidy profit was not made clear in a conference call Wednesday with investors and industry analysts.
Lay made no comment then on whether he has declined the so-called golden parachute retirement package.
According to his contract, the Enron head is legally entitled to $20.2 million in cash for every remaining year of his contract if he leaves the company within the 60 days of the company being taken over.
That entitles him to a $60.6 million pay-off, but he reportedly told several company officials that he would forsake that sum.
Yet, Lay also sold Enron shares between January and July this year before the collapse of the company's share prices for an estimated $27.5 million.
Company shares currently are valued around $7.5 billion, compared to their peak of $65.9 billion last August.
Enron is the biggest wholesale power marketing company in the world, operating a gas pipeline system extending 25,000 miles.
The company, however, had begun to over-extend itself beyond its core operations, and Lay told investors that it would want to shed its high-speed Internet as well as power operations in India and Brazil.
"In hindsight, we made some very bad investments in non-core businesses," Lay said.
He also admitted that the company had overburdened itself with debt, and conducted deals that led to conflicts of interest, which are now under U.S. regulatory investigation.
Enron reported earlier this month of posting a loss of $618 million in the third quarter, and it sees fourth quarter earnings remaining weak as well.
Officials said Wednesday that they would be issuing guidance on the current quarter's earnings within the next fortnight, but did not offer any further details.
Last Friday, Dynegy said it would buy out Enron for $10.5 billion, on the agreement that it would also assume $13 billion of Enron's debt.
But while the two companies have publicly declared that they hope the deal will be completed by next summer, there is mounting concern that combining the two energy giants would violate antitrust regulations.
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission and U.S. antitrust agencies, as well as various other state and federal institutions must review the negotiations.
Issues raised will include what the competitions would be, the total market size, and how and if the companies could be divested.
There is little Enron can actually do in the meantime.
Indeed, when questioned about the ongoing investigations about the legality of the buyout, Lay merely stated that Enron would continue to comply with the need of government authorities as needed.
Copyright 2001 by United Press International.
All rights reserved.
A handful of National Guard troops were expected to help secure the perimeter of the Capitol campus, in relief of Capitol Hill police who have been working 12-hour shifts six days a week since Sept. 11.
Ten military police were expected to be deployed Friday with about 100 more joining the police next week.
It will be the first such deployment since the 1968 riots in Washington and had been planned for Thursday evening.
The plan was delayed a day when the Washington Metropolitan Police Department objected to a request by Congress to deputize the guardsmen so they could carry side arms and perform the powers of arrest.
Washington Mayor Anthony Williams intervened late Thursday night and decided to allow the military police to be deputized, said Capitol Hill Police Spokesman Dan Nichols.
Capitol Hill Police are an independent law enforcement agency under the control of Congress, with full law enforcement powers in the District.
Typically, they patrol and protect the campus of the Capitol and some parts of the surrounding areas, but in the aftermath of recent terror attacks, the perimeter has been expanded to a 40-block area.
Police have been monitoring traffic and keeping trucks out of the perimeter, which has taxed resources and forced the rank and file officers to work 72-hour a week shifts over the last two months.
The National Guard presence is expected to help allow officers to work fewer hours and allow for new anti-terrorist training, Nichols told reporters.
A spokesman for the Democratic Senate leadership said that guardsmen would not be stationed outside the Capitol itself.
"That wouldn't look good, to have machine gun nests and soldiers outside the people's House," he said.
The soldiers will mostly be used at traffic checkpoints far from the building itself, Nichols said.
Copyright 2001 by United Press International.
All rights reserved.
Yugoslavia, Nov. 17 (UPI) --
As Kosovo's first general election got underway Saturday, an anthrax scare forced the quarantine of thousands of mail-in ballots received from abroad.
A team of about a dozen local and international election observers began carefully opening and inspecting each of the 15,000 envelopes for suspicious powder or other substances.
The election monitors, among them several European career diplomats, donned face masks, rubber gloves and plastic gowns for the task, which was expected to continue through Sunday before all the ballots could be transferred to the main counting center.
No tainted ballots were found Saturday.
Checking each ballot individually was only "precautionary for ourselves, our staff and people in Kosovo," said Claire Trevena, spokeswomen for the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe that is overseeing the election.
No specific threat of a biological attack had been received, she said.
All the envelopes had already been subjected to an infrared scan designed to kill any bacterial spores in Vienna, Austria, where the ballots were mailed to OSCE headquarters.
Trevena put the chances of finding a contaminated ballot at a mere "0.0001 percent."
Still, preparations for the manual screening process had been made several weeks ago and the ballots were placed under guard at a temporary office set up an isolated industrial district outside Kosovo's capital Pristina.
Emerging from the cramped office where the inspection was taking place, one British election official with long experience with the OSCE said the tedious process disgusted him.
"It's ridiculous to be reduced to this," he said, taking off a facemask and rubber gloves for a brief break.
Ethnic Albanians living abroad, mainly in Germany, Switzerland and Austria sent most of the votes received by mail.
Thousands of other ballots being cast outside Kosovo by Serb refugees living in Montenegro and Serbia proper were not affected by the anthrax precautions.
Turnout at the polls was running slightly behind that of last year's local elections, but was expected to top 70 percent, according to the OSCE.
Serb participation in the vote was expected to be far lower than the overall figure, though election officials were pleased that Serbs did not boycott the polls as they did last year.
Scattered protests briefly broke out at several polling places when Albanian hard-liners demanded that the Albanian flag be flown outside schools and offices where voting was underway.
OSCE officials had forbidden the display of national symbols at election sites to keep Kosovo's minorities from feeling discriminated against in the 90 percent ethnic-Albanian province.
After a flurry of consultations among top election officials, the OSCE backed down and allowed the flags to fly, in a compromise that allowed balloting to continue without further interruption.
Police in the southern city of Gnjilane said protests there lasted only 20 minutes and passed without incident.
Many Serb voters in the ethnically divided city of Mitrovica were reported to have been intimidated by groups of nationalist Serb paramilitaries covertly keeping tabs on polling places near the city center.
The paramilitaries, known as the "bridge watchers" for their often violent attempts to keep ethnic Albanians from crossing to the Serb-dominated north side of the town, had urged a boycott of the election.
Ethnic Albanians nearly unanimously want to see Kosovo become an independent state and many expect the election to push their cause forward.
U.N. officials have repeatedly said the poll will not affect the final status of Kosovo, which remains unresolved more than two years after an eleven-week NATO bombing campaign wrested control of the province from Yugoslavia.
The election will choose Kosovo's first-ever democratically elected parliament, restoring partial home rule for the first time since former Serbian president Slobodan Milosevic revoked the province's autonomy in 1989.
The Democratic League of Kosovo is widely expected to come out on top in the polls, propelling its leader, Ibrahim Rugova, to Kosovo's presidency.
However, the new government will have limited authority, as key responsibilities will remain in the hands of the U.N.-led administration of the province.
Copyright 2001 by United Press International.
All rights reserved.
Preliminary box office figures show that the Buena Vista/Pixar animated feature "Monsters, Inc." was tops again at the American box office.
It took in an estimated $42.6 million.
That means that it lost only about 26 percent of its opening week audience.
And, according to The Hollywood Reporter, it is the first animated feature to reach the $100 million mark in nine days. "
Shrek," "Toy Story 2" and "The Lion King" needed 11 days, respectively, to do that.
There is speculation that "Monster" will be a $300 million movie when worldwide receipts are in.
Author Ken Kesey is best known to many as the man who wrote the book that became the award-winning movie "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest."
MSNBC says that the novelist who became a "psychedelic prankster" has died in Grants Pass, Ore.
Kesey's greatest critical acclaim came for his book "Sometimes a Great Notion."
But it was "Nest" that made him internationally famous.
Ironically he never much liked the way his book was turned into a Hollywood classic.
Even though the 1974 Milos Foreman movie was a big winner at the Oscars -- winning best picture, best director and both the best actor and best actress honors -- Kesey sued the producers of the film, claiming that it failed to properly portray the viewpoint of one of the book's main characters.
His 1960s cross-country bus trip with his band of drug-taking Merry Pranksters became the right stuff for Tom Wolfe's book "The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test."
Kesey died of complications from liver surgery.
He was 66.
To the strains of "Hooray for Hollywood," Los Angeles city officials cut the ribbon to open the new Hollywood and Highland project, a massive retail center surrounding the high-tech theater that will be the permanent home for the Oscars.
KNX radio is reporting that actor-director Rob Reiner opened the complex with the words: "Hollywood is back!"
On hand was a cadre of well-known faces, including third-generation Hollywood luminary Angelica Huston who told the station that Oscar should be proud of his new digs.
Although security was tight, the opening went off without incident with about 3,000 first-day visitors.
The shopping complex features more than 70 stores on three levels.
The state-of-the-art Kodak Theater will host the Oscars, beginning next year.
The return of the Oscars to the neighborhood means a return to Oscar's roots.
The first awards were handed out at the nearby Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel in the 1930s.
'PROPAGANDA' WITH BUSH REP.
A group of Hollywood "movers and shakers" lunched over the weekend with Pres.
Bush's senior advisor, Karl Rove.
The Los Angeles Times says that in "broad strokes, the White house has said it wants the involvement of the entertainment industry in the campaign against terrorism."
The involvement, though, won't be in the same vein as the jingoistic stuff cranked out during the Second World War where the Japanese, the Germans and the Italians were called names that make watching those films embarrassing to today's audiences.
The publication notes, though, that although no pro-American, anti-terrorism film has yet to be produced, many Hollywood stars have already jumped on the concert and fundraising bandwagon.
By the way, every major studio sent a top-level representative to the meeting -- including several chairmen and CEOs.
Look for a new TV series from the creators of the immensely popular "Will & Grace" sitcom.
The Hollywood Reporter says that producers David Kohan and Max Mutchnick have come up with a new show with four main characters, all quirky.
Warner Bros. has given the project
its OK and production will begin soon.
The initial run is for 13 episodes -- a far cry from the 39 producers used to crank out before the days of costly production and even costlier stars.
The publication describes the plotline as "two couples involved in three relationships."
In the words of P.D.Q. Bach, it may be a kind of "Hansel and Gretel and Ted and Alice."
The series is part of the promised output for Kohan and Mutchnick written into their 1999 $16 million contract.
In the 1950s classic horror actor Boris Karloff hosted and starred in a pioneering TV series called "The Veil."
Now, in his most-recent daily reviews for radio stations, veteran Hollywood reporter Leonard Maltin says that the shows are being released on DVD.
But, according to Maltin, for the most part the episodes are a disappointment.
Karloff was tapped to do the broadcasts after a successful run in an anthology series called "Thriller."
The "Veil" shows promised to delve into unexplained mysteries.
Unfortunately, Maltin says there is no mystery as to why the series was never released after its 10 episodes were produced.
"It just isn't any good," he reports.
Historically, it fleshes out the Karloff library.
Artistically, except for the fun of watching the master at work, the shows were a flop.
It won't be long before American audiences will get to see the long-anticipated initial Harry Potter movie.
The film has already opened in the U.K. to rave reviews.
The only real question about the future success of the series seems to be whether or not its young star -- 12-year-old Daniel Radcliffe -- can avoid puberty long enough to fulfill his commitment for a second film and retain his boyish charm and voice.
Movie theaters are reporting that advance ticket sales for "Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone" are already brisk, even though the U.S. debut is a week away.
The $125 million film is set to open here in the States on Friday .
Copyright 2001 by United Press International.
All rights reserved.
New York health officials said Friday results of anthrax testing done on the city's subway are expected to be released on Saturday.
Investigators are very curious to find if anthrax spores were found on the No. 6 subway line used by hospital worker Kathy T. Nguyen, 61, who died Oct. 31 from inhalation anthrax infection.
The case has baffled federal health and law enforcement officials because they cannot link the woman to any contaminated locations -- such as the offices of several media organizations, U.S. Post Office facilities or the handful of federal government ofices in Washington -- where anthrax has been found since the anthrax attack began in early October.
"We believe that whatever findings we may find in the subway will guide us with respect to tracking the source of the exposure, but not have any impact on public health," said Dr. Neal Cohen, New York City health commissioner.
Health officials have said spores found on the subway would not be considred harmful to passengers because of the time elapsed since the Nguyen infection was disclosed.
Seventeen anthrax infections, including 10 of the most severe inhalation type, have been confirmed in New York, New Jersey, Washington and Florida.
There also are seven cases of cutaneous or skin anthrax infection and five additional cases of suspected cutaneous infection.
Four people have died from inhalation anthrax.
While cross contamination of spores from anthrax-laden letters onto postal machinery, other mail, mail bags, furniture or equipment may have caused numerous postal facilities, government offices and media outlets to test positive for anthrax, health officials believe such small or trace amounts of the pathogen usually are not enough to cause even cutaneous infection and almost certainly not enough to cause inhalation infection.
Copyright 2001 by United Press International.
All rights reserved.
The Pentagon said Friday officials believe Mohammed Atef, a top al Qaida deputy who is related to suspected terrorist mastermind Osama bin Laden by marriage, was killed near Kabul.
Atef's death has not yet been confirmed and the circumstances of his reported demise remain sketchy but the official said Atef was not killed in strikes on buildings near Kabul and Kandahar on Tuesday and Wednesday that were known to contain al Qaida leaders.
Atef's daughter married one of bin Laden's sons in January, The Washington Post reported.
Atef is believed to be one of bin Laden's closest aides and al Qaida's military commander.
He is believed to be in charge of terrorist training camps in Afghanistan.
The Taliban militia vowed Friday to stage a comeback and recapture key areas in Afghanistan it lost to the Northern Alliance last week. "
Despite present difficulties, war of the entire infidel world and opposition of some Islamic countries, our position is quite good by the grace of God," Syed Mohammad Tayyab Agha, a Taliban spokesman, said.
"Sympathies of the Muslims are with us.
Inshallah (God willing), we would once again demonstrate our strength and recapture the lost lands."
Agha called the Taliban's withdrawal from key cities, including Kabul and Mazar-i-Sharif, a "tactical move," Pakistan's NNI news agency reported.
A handful of National Guard troops were deputized to help secure the perimeter of the Capitol campus Friday, patrolling in relief of Capitol Hill police, who have been working 12-hour shifts six days a week since Sept. 11.
Ten military police were expected to be deployed with about 100 more joining the police next week.
In the past, National Guard troops have guarded the Capitol during the 1968 riots, World War II and the Civil War.
Argenbright Security Corp., the largest airport security provider in the nation, was preparing Friday to appeal an order yanking its permit to provide checkpoint screening at Boston's Logan International Airport.
Massachusetts State Police Col. John DiFava, interim security chief at Logan, Thursday night said he ordered Argenbright to leave the airport within 10 days because of recent security lapses.
A state police certification unit will have a hearing Nov. 30 to determine if the company's license should be permanently revoked.
Lebanese Prime Minister Rafic Hariri hoped Friday that when the military operation in Afghanistan comes to an end, the United States, Europe and Russia will put more efforts to try solve the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The Lebanese official said even before the Sept. 11 terror attacks on New York and Washington, Arabs had been calling on the United States to find a settlement for the Arab-Israeli conflict because leaving this problem unresolved "creates a state of instability in the Arab and Muslim worlds and helps extremism (increase)."
United Parcel Service, the globe circling delivery company, expects to deliver more than 325 million packages worldwide during this year's holiday peak season between Thanksgiving and Christmas.
According to the Atlanta-based UPS, the annual surge in holiday volume is forecast to crest this year on Tuesday, Dec. 18, when the company said it anticipates delivering more than 18 million air and ground packages globally, or more than 200 every second, a 35 percent jump from the standard delivery volume.
Celebrating Thanksgiving will be a little more expensive this year than last.
The American Farm Bureau Federation said this year's tab will be $35.04, up $2.67, for a traditional dinner of turkey, stuffing, cranberries, pumpkin pie and all the trimmings for 10.
The cost of a turkey went up 17 cents a pound to 95 cents so a 16-pound bird will run $15.13.
Profit-taking and earnings reports that did little to encourage hopes of an economic recovery took their toll on Wall Street in early afternoon trading Friday.
The blue chip Dow Jones industrial average was off 16.26, or 0.16 percent, to 9,856.13 while the tech-laden Nasdaq composite index was off 5.90, or 0.31 percent, at 1,894.67.
Lleyton Hewitt could not have dreamed of a better setting to make tennis history.
In front of a raucous crowd, the Australian became the youngest men's player to finish the year at No. 1 after beating childhood idol Patrick Rafter, 7-5, 6-2 on Friday at the $3.65 million Tennis Masters Cup.
At 20 years and eight months, Hewitt surpassed last year's Champions Race leader Gustavo Kuerten, who lost earlier in the day to Russia's Yevgeny Kafelnikov, 6-2, 4-6, 6-3.
Kuerten finished 0-3 in the round-robin tournament, failing to add to his total of 771 points in the ATP Champions Race.
Copyright 2001 by United Press International.
All rights reserved.
The much-anticipated public audition by 7-foot-5 Chinese basketball star Yao Ming was overshadowed today by charges that Chinese officials are trying to influence the NBA draft by discouraging teams from picking him.
At issue is a private workout held by Yao for the New York Knicks on Tuesday and another similar workout scheduled with the Chicago Bulls for Thursday.
Most NBA teams believed Yao, projected by some to be the No. 1 overall pick in the June 26 draft, would hold only one league-run workout, today in Chicago, that all teams could attend.
"I don't think teams should be blackmailed," said Jerry West, hired Tuesday as the Memphis Grizzlies' president of basketball operations.
"We've had that before in the NBA with agents saying the player isn't going to play here or isn't going to play there. . . .
You cannot do that . . .
I think it destroys the integrity of the draft."
The private workouts surprised NBA officials and angered some teams denied similar requests by Yao's Chinese representatives, who earlier had expressed a desire for the player to wind up in a city with a large Chinese community.
"We asked [for a private workout] and they said they didn't have time to do that," said West, whose team has the third-best chance of securing the No. 1 pick when draft order is determined by lottery later this month.
"The two teams that seem like there was enough time to do it for were New York and Chicago.
It's no coincidence that they have large Chinese populations.
I don't think there are a lot of Chinese in Memphis [.72 percent of the population, based on the 2000 census].
It would not send the right message to me [to be scared to draft him].
If he were available and that's who we wanted to draft, we would draft him."
Yao, 21, and the Chinese officials at the workout would not speak to the media, instead issuing a general statement by Yao thanking the NBA and expressing the hope that "I have not disappointed you with my performance today.
"
Washington Wizards General Manager Wes Unseld, who attended today's session with assistant general manager Rod Higgins, Director of Player Personnel Fred Whitfield and scout Wes Unseld Jr., was told by a reporter about Yao's private workouts.
He then checked on Yao's availability later this week, but was told Yao would be traveling back to China Friday morning.
He left the alumni gym at Loyola University without further comment.
Washington, with a large Asian population and the MCI Center located in Chinatown, is believed to be one of the cities where Chinese officials would not mind Yao playing.
The Wizards have just a 7-in-1,000 chance at getting the top pick.
If Washington does not land one of the top three selections at the draft lottery later this month, it would pick 11th.
Officials from other NBA teams were unhappy Yao was working out privately for only two teams, but they declined to speak publicly.
Today's hour-long workout was expected to be teams' only look at Yao before the draft.
Any team that drafts a foreign player holds his rights indefinitely, according to NBA rules.
But Yao wouldn't be the first player who tried to dissuade a team from picking him.
The most well-known incident also involved the Grizzlies, who drafted Maryland guard Steve Francis second overall in 1999 against his wishes.
Francis did not want to play for the Grizzlies, then located in Vancouver, and eventually forced a trade to the Houston Rockets.
It's difficult to assess how today's developments will affect this year's draft.
Yao's draft position is already complicated by the possibility of some unique issues in contract negotiations.
Not only is the Chinese government expected to take as much as half of Yao's salary, but it also might force him to report late to training camp or miss part of the season because of commitments to the Chinese national team.
And Yao's club team, the Shanghai Sharks, is expected to take a cut of Yao's salary and could demand other compensation.
Despite all that, the possibility of landing a 7-5 star drew representatives from 26 of the NBA's 29 teams, including Miami Coach Pat Riley, and about 150 media members.
It is believed to be the first tryout run by the league for an individual player.
Many observers walked away with positive reviews of Yao, who averaged 32.4 points in leading the Shanghai Sharks to the Asian Championship this season.
Former NBA coach P.J. Carlesimo ran Yao and three other players through shooting, passing and defensive drills.
"He was impressive," said a Wizards official who did not want to be identified.
Knicks Coach Don Chaney, among the team officials who worked out Yao on Tuesday, said: "I think he made an impression in terms of a guy that size being able to do the things he did out there.
He's a very good shooter, seems to have a high skill level and has a feel for the game."
West agreed: "This guy is big but he is more of a finesse player at this point.
In time I think everyone would like to see him play closer to the basket.
He can shoot the ball out there and if you've got people who can get into the lane who can find him, not only will he probably make the shot, he can make a good pass."
Yao has never played more than 34 regular season games but showed shooting range, good footwork on both ends of the floor and decent athletic skills.
The contact drills with 7-foot-2 Oregon center Chris Christoffersen were limited.
Christoffersen pushed Yao away from the basket on a drive and blocked a feeble hook shot once.
"My goal was to have fun and make him look good," Christoffersen said.
"I'm trying to get him into the league.
That's what I'm here for."
Norway Thor Heyerdahl, the Norwegian adventurer who crossed the Pacific on a balsa log raft and detailed his harrowing 101-day voyage in the book "Kon-Tiki," died Thursday night.
He was 87.
Heyerdahl stopped taking food, water or medication in early April after being diagnosed with a terminal brain tumor.
"Norway has lost an original and spectacular researcher, explorer and adventurer," Prime Minister Kjell Magne Bondevik said.
Experts scoffed at Heyerdahl when he set off to cross the Pacific aboard a balsa raft in 1947, saying it would get water logged and sink within days.
After 101 days and 4,900 miles, he proved them wrong by reaching Polynesia from Peru in a bid to prove his theories of human migration.
His later expeditions included voyages aboard the reed rafts Ra, Ra II and Tigris.
His wide-ranging archaeological studies were often controversial and challenged accepted views.
Until his illness, Heyerdahl had maintained a daunting pace of research, lectures and public debate over his unconventional theories on human migration.
His third wife, Jacqueline, said he made 70 airline trips last year.
Relatives said he died in his sleep at home in Colla Michari, Italy.
He had been hospitalized near there in late March when he became ill over the easter holidays.
Thor Heyerdahl Jr., told The Associated Press in a telephone interview from his home in Norway that his father died at 7:10 p.m.
He spent his final days surrounded by family at Colla Michari, a Roman-era Italian village he bought and restored in the 1950s.
His permanent home since 1990 was on the Spanish island Tenerife in the Atlantic Ocean off the coast of Morocco.
Though he lived and worked abroad for decades, Heyerdahl was a national hero in his homeland, where one newspaper crowned him Norwegian of the Century in a millennium reader poll.
He is survived by his third wife, four of his five children, eight grandchildren and six great-grandchildren.
After Heyerdahl's 1947 voyage, conventional anthropologists dismissed the college dropout's theories, saying they were only the work of a gifted amateur.
But the adventurer gained worldwide fame with the voyage.
His book about that trip sold tens of millions of copies and his 1951 movie about the Kon-Tiki voyage won an Academy Award for best documentary.
He followed that trip with expeditions on reed rafts seeking to show that ancient people could have sailed from the Old World to the New.
His later studies focused on ancient step pyramids including those in Peru and on the island of Tenerife off Africa which he believed could be evidence of maritime links between ancient civilizations.
Before Heyerdahl made his voyage on the Kon-Tiki, he had to overcome a major obstacle: He was deathly afraid of water.
He had nearly drowned twice as a child in Larvik, Norway, and overcame his fear only at age 22, when he fell into a raging river in Tahiti and swam to safety.
"If you had asked me as a 17-year-old whether I would go to sea on a raft, I would have absolutely denied the possibility.
At that time, I suffered from fear of the water," Heyerdahl once said.
His Kon-Tiki trip was intended to support his theory that the South Sea Islands were settled by explorers from pre-Inca South America.
The prevailing theory is that Polynesia was settled from Southeast Asia.
Heyerdahl conceived his theory during a year spent on the Pacific island of Fatu Hiva in the Marquesas group.
He noticed that stone figures of the Polynesian chief-god Tiki in the jungle were "remarkably like the monoliths left by extinct civilizations in South America."
His colorfully written book about the voyage and his theories was published in more than 60 countries and sold more than 25 million copies.
In the 1950s, he took more conventional expeditions to the Galapagos and to Easter Island.
The latter trip produced "Aku-Aku," a 1957 book about the origins of the remote island's enormous stone heads.
In 1969, he attempted to sail from Morocco to Barbados aboard the Ra, a boat made of papyrus reeds like those in ancient Egyptian wall drawings.
But he hadn't followed the drawings closely and the boat broke up.
A year later he tried again, aboard the Ra II, which was held together by ropes as shown in the wall drawings.
This time he succeeded, making the 3,200-mile crossing in 55 days.
In 1977, he launched another reed boat, the Tigris, in an attempt to sail from the Persian Gulf to see how far the people of ancient Mesopotamia might have been able to sail and spread their ancient culture.
The Tigris sailed 4,200 miles in 144 days, only to be blocked on its way to the Red Sea by warfare in the Horn of Africa.
He and his 10 member crew set the Tigris on fire "to protest what was happening in this war-torn region."
Heyerdahl also worried about humanity's future because of the pollution of the ocean and atmosphere, urging stronger international control through the United Nations.
At Oslo's Kon-Tiki Museum in 1998, a visiting schoolchild asked Heyerdahl if he ever got scared in his expeditions.
"Oh, yes.
On every single expedition," the explorer replied.
"Everything was planned to the last detail.
I haven't survived by good luck, but rather by the absence of bad luck."
Heyerdahl continued to challenge assumptions, often bringing outrage.
In 1995, he claimed to have found evidence that Christopher Columbus reached America in 1477, rather than 1492, as a teen-age crewman on a Danish-Portuguese expedition.
In 1999, he claimed that Norseman Leif Eriksson sailed to North America a millennium earlier as a Christian missionary rather than as a Viking explorer as is generally believed.
Heyerdahl was born Oct. 6, 1914, the son of a widely traveled banker and a mother with a scientific bent.
He remembered her giving him anthropology books instead of children's books to read when he was sick in bed.
He entered the University of Oslo to study zoology but quit before getting a degree because he was impatient to start fieldwork.
He switched to anthropology while doing fieldwork in the Marquesas in 1937.
Despite the challenges, he gained growing respect as a visionary about the possibility if not the details of ancient mariners navigating the globe.
He was awarded 11 honorary doctorates from various universities.
In all of his adventures, he said, his most memorable moment was hitting land after 101 days on Kon-Tiki.
"After the huge waves that were higher than the mast, we could look around and count that all six of us were still alive.
That we could dig our toes into warm dry sand, on a foundation that didn't roll in all directions," he said.
He also voiced one regret: "I might have had a lot more fun as a boy if I had learned to swim."
The first recipient of a fully implantable artificial heart has suffered a large stroke, doctors announced yesterday.
Robert L. Tools, 59, developed sudden weakness of his right arm and leg Sunday afternoon and was unable to speak or understand speech, according to his doctors at Jewish Hospital in Louisville.
He was subsequently put back on a mechanical ventilator to prevent him from choking.
The doctors say the stroke occurred when a clot traveled to Tools's brain and plugged a large artery.
Where the clot formed is uncertain.
The best guess, however, is that it arose in the artificial heart.
Blood in contact with metal or plastic surfaces clots readily, but it can be thinned with anticoagulant drugs.
Tools has been unable to take blood-thinners for most of the time since he underwent surgery July 2 because of life-threatening episodes of bleeding from his stomach and nose.
He has required more than 30 units of transfused blood since.
"We are very disappointed," said Laman Gray, one of the surgeons.
"We consider him more as a friend than a patient, and we are sorry to see he has had a problem."
He added that Tools's family "is very, very optimistic."
The stroke is considered a major setback for Tools, who had been doing so well that last week he left the hospital for an outing with the Louisville mayor to promote dining out.
Buoyed by his progress, doctors had said it was possible he could be home for Christmas.
Before he received the heart, Tools was not expected to live more than three months.
Large strokes can be fatal even days after they occur.
Damaged brain tissue can swell and put pressure on other regions, such as the areas that regulate breathing and blood pressure.
Blood vessels in the dead tissue can also bleed, causing catastrophic brain hemorrhages.
Lynn Simon, a neurologist caring for Tools, said brain images don't show either complication.
However, the patient is still at risk for both, and especially for bleeding, as he is now on anticoagulant drugs.
The brain's speech and language center is on the left side of the brain in 90 percent of people.
The left side of the brain also controls the limbs on the right side of the body.
A large part of that half of the brain is damaged, Simon said, adding that it will take time to determine how many of Tools's current deficits are permanent.
The artificial heart is made by AbioMed, a Massachusetts medical device company.
It replaces the heart's two major pumping chambers -- the ventricles -- and is powered by an implanted battery.
Unlike previous artificial hearts, however, no wires or tubes pierce the skin.
The battery can be recharged with an induction coil that transmits through the skin.
Five patients have received the device since the operation on Tools in July.
All are still alive, although some have had rocky recuperations.
Another patient at Jewish Hospital, Tom Christerson, 70, recently had a course of fevers as high as 107 degrees.
No infection was found, and the physicians now believe the fever was a rare reaction to a drug.
Tools's stroke was the first blood clot detected during the total of 278 days that the patients have had the devices.
The recent events were recounted at a news conference at the Louisville hospital yesterday.
Robert Kung, an AbioMed engineer, said Tools's complication would not slow clinical research on the artificial heart.
The company is awaiting permission from the Food and Drug Administration to put the device in five more patients.
Every person with hardware in the heart must take anticoagulant drugs to prevent clots from forming.
(People who receive valves transplanted from pig hearts do not require anticoagulation.)
Any clot forming in the heart has a high likelihood of ending up in the brain because the arteries serving that organ are among the first to branch off the aorta, the main vessel carrying blood out of the heart to the rest of the body.
"We never would have intended to put this device in and not anticoagulate him," Gray said.
Tools started to bleed from his stomach two days after his operation.
At the time, he was on the blood-thinner heparin and other anti-clotting drugs.
The drugs were stopped.
Doctors had inspected his stomach with a fiber optic scope just a few days before surgery, and it was normal, Gray said.
They've repeated the procedure about 20 times since to monitor and cauterize small bleeding arteries.
For a while, they also reduced the volume of blood the heart pumped per minute, thinking that would cut the bleeding.
That strategy appeared to work.
However, when Tools briefly lost the ability to talk for a day earlier in the fall, the doctors restarted the anticoagulants, fearing a stroke was imminent.
Tools was stable for a while, but then had a nosebleed requiring a a two-pint transfusion of blood.
The anticoagulants were temporarily stopped again.
After throwing its support strongly behind the United States in the new war on terrorism, Russia is beginning to look for payback, not only in the form of security agreements but also in economic concessions that would help it integrate more fully with the West.
As the leaders of the two countries prepare for their summit in Washington and at President Bush's Texas ranch later this month, Russian President Vladimir Putin is under mounting pressure to demonstrate that he has achieved something in return for his recent bow to the United States, according to Putin's advisers and allies.
Although the Russian president once vowed there would be no "haggling" over the terms of his cooperation with U.S. strikes against Afghanistan, Kremlin insiders have drawn up a long bargaining list that includes everything from improved trade status to relief from billions of dollars in Soviet-era debt.
Putin's advisers fear he has gotten too far out in front of Russian public opinion and must return from the summit with a package of tangible rewards that will demonstrate the benefits of joining the West.
"President Putin now is in a quite complicated situation," said Boris Nemtsov, leader of a pro-Western political party, the Union of Right Forces.
"It will be difficult for him to continue such a policy if the West doesn't respond, not only on military issues but also on economic issues."
Nemtsov and others who have met with Putin in recent days said the president, while genuine in his overture to the West, has become increasingly impatient for more concrete results. "
Personally, he made his choice, which was a huge decision for him," Nemtsov said.
"But now he's waiting for some response."
Asked in an interview if Putin had privately expressed frustration, Nemtsov replied, "Absolutely."
Putin does not express this in public, though, and in a speech this week reiterated that the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks were an assault not just against the United States, but also the world.
He does not want to be seen as crassly demanding trade-offs, advisers said; however, he is coming under tremendous pressure to justify shifting the country's foreign policy so radically.
While missile defense has dominated the discussion leading up to the summit in Washington and Crawford, Tex., Kremlin political allies and advisers have listed a number of economic measures they say would do more to build public support in Russia.
Among them: restructuring or forgiving the billions of dollars of Soviet debt; accelerating Russia's admission into the World Trade Organization; encouraging more foreign investment; and repealing the Cold War-era Jackson-Vanik Amendment, a 1974 law that intended to pressure Communist bloc countries to allow unfettered emigration as a condition of maintaining normal trading privileges with the United States.
The United States has signaled its willingness to accommodate Putin beyond simply muting criticism of the war in Chechnya and postponing anti-missile tests.
The Bush administration is studying legislation introduced by Joseph R. Biden Jr. (D-Del.), chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and Sen. Richard G. Lugar (R-Ind.) to write off some Soviet-era debt, and it may announce loans for Russian investment through the Export-Import Bank and Overseas Private Investment Corp., a federal agency that helps U.S. companies invest in developing nations.
But some of the Russian priorities could be hard to deliver.
While the administration has decided to revoke the Jackson-Vanik Amendment and had hoped to do so by the summit, U.S. officials said that winning congressional approval for lifting the sanctions on Russia and up to six other former Soviet republics could take several months.
The penalties have not been applied to Russia for years but must be revoked if Moscow is to gain entry to the World Trade Organization.
And while the United States can encourage Russian ascension to the WTO, it cannot unilaterally waive the economic restructuring also required for membership. 
Either way, senior officials said any gestures should not be read as horse-trading.
"We haven't been talking in the language of quid pro quos, but rather thinking in much broader terms," said U.S. Ambassador Alexander Vershbow.
"If there's a quid pro quo, it's that both sides will end up with a fundamentally better relationship.
It's a win-win."
From Moscow's point of view, Putin has already made a series of once-unthinkable concessions designed to reshape the Russia-U.S. relationship, which has been hampered by Cold War hangovers.
Since declaring "America, we are with you," on Sept. 11, the Russian president has closed his country's main spy base in Cuba and allowed an unprecedented U.S. military presence in former Soviet republics in Central Asia.
He has given support to U.S. military strikes in Afghanistan, eased his opposition to NATO expansion and even signaled his readiness to cut a deal on the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty.
Putin's immediate reaction -- he was the first world leader to call Bush after the terrorist attacks -- was all the more striking because during nearly two years in office he had earned a reputation as a cautious, even inscrutable leader who liked to quote the Russian proverb "
We measure seven times before we cut once."
But while some see Putin's instinctive embrace of the West as proof of his true inclinations, it has raised broader questions: Is this a partnership of convenience only, a World War II-like coming together against a common enemy that will evaporate as soon as the threat is gone?
Or can it be the radical restructuring of relations envisioned but never achieved after the Cold War?
As Andrei Kokoshin, former head of the Russian Defense Council, sees it, Putin's new policy "is a real, clear-cut position.
He is saying, definitively, we are part of European civilization."
But the rhetoric of partnership, Kokoshin and others said, has so far exceeded the reality.
"It's not just a question of missile defense.
We need to create a real system of collaboration to deal with potential threats.
And such political mechanisms simply don't exist yet between our countries.
"
For the moment, Putin has earned broad praise around the world for his actions.
On Tuesday, at a Moscow conference of the World Economic Forum, the business group that usually meets in Davos, Switzerland, Putin was showered with plaudits.
Klaus Schwab, president of the forum, introduced Putin as "a man who in a very short time has created a new image and a new reality for Russia -- powerful, responsible, young, dynamic and forward-oriented."
"The terrorist attacks of the 11th of September have rewritten history," Schwab said.
"Russia has been, under your decisive leadership, not only an indispensable partner in the fight against terrorism, but a whole change in mind-set around the world has happened.
Russia is not anymore in some way a country apart. . . .
Russia has become an integral part of the world community."
At home, however, the Russian public remains skeptical of joining the West, while inside the bureaucracy, Cold War-era generals and diplomats used to bashing the United States have yet to fully embrace the new presidential line.
Some have even started comparing Putin to Mikhail Gorbachev, the last Soviet leader, who pursued a pro-Western foreign policy that left him vulnerable at home. "
Putin today is facing the same threat that Gorbachev did 10 years ago, because there is such a distance between the president's position and that of the elite," said Andrei Ryabov, an analyst at the Carnegie Moscow Center.
"
Putin risks repeating Gorbachev's mistakes unless he can create a strong and stable coalition within Russia for his policy.
Right now, this policy is simply his personal choice."
Alexander Oslon, a Kremlin pollster, said that while "there has been a noticeable shift in terms of attitudes toward America," Russians have yet to enthusiastically endorse Putin's new direction.
"There is a real chance to establish partnership with the West," he said, "but it goes without saying there are many doubts."
Recent surveys suggest the degree of Russian ambivalence.
A poll conducted by the All-Russian Center for the Study of Public Opinion just after the U.S. bombing campaign began found only 41 percent in favor of it and 57 percent opposed; moreover, 47 percent said Russia should remain neutral, while just 41 percent said Russia should offer support.
Still, this has yet to dent Putin's own popularity, which even inched a couple points up, to 75 percent, in a poll released Wednesday.
The situation also appears to have created tension in Putin's inner circle.
The president has few friends in government who are closer to him than Defense Minister Sergei Ivanov, but Putin has contradicted Ivanov publicly at least twice in recent weeks -- most prominently when Ivanov categorically ruled out a U.S. military presence in Central Asia only to have Putin agree to it days later.
Some veteran officers said the military understands a shift has occurred. "
Before, we did not understand each other -- we were speaking as the deaf to the dumb," said Anatoly Kulikov, a former general and internal affairs minister.
"But now the political elite and Russian society expect not just an improvement of relations, but that this improvement will lead to concrete steps."
In Moscow, politicians and analysts have become significantly more vocal in questioning whether Putin has caved in to U.S. demands without receiving anything in return.
"So far, no reciprocal moves have been made by the American side," said Sergei Rogov, director of the Institute for USA and Canada Studies.
"On Sept. 10, they wanted only one thing from us: Take the bitter pill, sign, [and] the ABM Treaty has ceased to exist.
Today, they need from us very many things, and there is nothing shameful in acting like allies always do -- we oblige you, you oblige us.
Our position when we do not ask for anything in return is naive and dangerous."
But others have warned Putin against such thinking.
"I told him, this is not a case for bargaining," Grigory Yavlinsky, parliamentary leader of the progressive Yabloko party, said in an interview.
"Our national interests are to put down the terrorists.
This is our priority, not the loans or the WTO."
Staff writer Alan Sipress in Washington contributed to this report. 
Related Links
Top executives from every major Hollywood studio and other titans in the entertainment industry emerged from a private discussion with senior White House adviser Karl Rove this afternoon vowing to play a broad, but still vague, role in the nation's fight against terrorism.
Today's meeting, the second White House overture for Hollywood's help since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, lasted less than two hours inside a chic hotel here and was an extraordinary sight: rival studio moguls brainstorming with an administration that the entertainment industry had hardly welcomed into office.
But as they left, both sides said they were pleased with the tone of the conversation and expressed confidence that it would lead to action without White House meddling in content.
"We've just concluded a unique experience," said Jack Valenti, chairman of the Motion Picture Association of America, who helped organize the meeting at the White House's request.
"I've never seen this kind of gathering. . . .
There was a seamless web of unity."
Rove and others said they discussed a range of ideas, from simple steps such as sending new movies to U.S. troops overseas, to embarking on creative projects such as movie trailers focused on homeland security or Islam, or documentaries in both English and Arabic about the war.
Rove, who called the meeting "wonderful," insisted that the White House had not come to enlist Hollywood in a propaganda campaign or to dictate how it should help the war effort.
"Our job will not be to direct, to approve, or to ask," he said.
"The industry decides what it will do and when it will do it."
Valenti said bluntly: "Content was off the table."
But Rove did come with a seven-point agenda of broad themes for Hollywood to ponder, suggesting that the industry find creative ways to urge Americans to support the war with volunteerism, to raise the morale of U.S. troops, and to illustrate that "this is a war against terrorism, not Islam."
Sherry Lansing, chairwoman of Paramount Pictures, called the meeting "the beginning of the beginning" and said industry executives would meet again soon to work on specific plans.
She and other executives said they stressed to Rove that they were not interested in producing propaganda, but wanted to help.
"All of us have had this incredible need, this incredible urge to do something," Lansing said, adding that the subject "crosses party lines."
Hollywood is a gold mine for Democratic fundraisers, and President Bush has few of the close ties to the entertainment industry that President Clinton had.
Participants in today's meeting, which ended slightly earlier than had been planned, also said that at no point were any political deals suggested for enlisting the help of Hollywood, which has been under fire in Congress for the violent content it produces in films and television and fears new regulation.
"Nothing was discussed that in any way touched a nerve," said Bob Iger, Walt Disney Co.'s president.
Although both sides were circumspect about today's meeting, it seemed to produce more enthusiasm than the first session that lower-level White House aides had last month with Hollywood producers and directors about assisting with the war.
Some industry executives said those talks lacked focus.
But today's gathering, which Rove initiated, drew more than 20 Hollywood heavyweights -- top power brokers in film and television as well as the leaders of the industry's creative unions.
Afterward, they stood side by side and said they were determined, for once, to work together to help the country during wartime.
No one at the meeting said he envisioned the kind of intensive collaboration Hollywood had with Washington during World War II, when acclaimed filmmakers such as Frank Capra created inspirational movies and documentaries on the conflict.
But no one ruled out making patriotic films, either.
Valenti, for one, expressed interest in developing movies or public-service announcements to be shown here and overseas that emphasize that the war on terrorism is not an attack on Muslims as well as films that have themes about "how America has been the most generous country in the world."
The Pentagon moved yesterday to step up its support of the anti-Taliban rebels in northern Afghanistan, acknowledging for the first time that U.S. troops are on the ground to coordinate intensified airstrikes and signaling that additional military assets may be moved to Central Asia in the coming weeks.
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said "something like 80 percent" of yesterday's airstrikes were aimed at frontline troops of Afghanistan's ruling Taliban militia.
A senior defense official said the strikes focused on Taliban units barring the opposition Northern Alliance from taking Afghanistan's major northern city, Mazar-e Sharif, and its capital, Kabul.
Rumsfeld said the U.S. combat troops in northern Afghanistan are playing a liaison role with the Northern Alliance, designating targets for airstrikes and helping arrange logistical support.
"We do have a very modest number of ground troops in the country," Rumsfeld told reporters at the Pentagon.
"They're in the north.
We've had others on the ground who have gone in and come out in the south."
A senior U.S. military officer, meanwhile, said it is likely that additional forces -- most likely strike aircraft -- will be moved in the coming weeks to Central Asia, where they could easily attack targets in northern Afghanistan.
Another official said that the deployment of a variety of military assets to the region has been proposed but not yet approved by Rumsfeld.
The United States is already using bases in the Central Asian republics of Uzbekistan and Tajikistan.
Rumsfeld is scheduled to fly to Central Asia early next week, following a trip he made there earlier this month.
Next week's visit comes on the heels of one made to Uzbekistan yesterday by Army Gen. Tommy R. Franks, the commander of the U.S.-led war effort in Afghanistan.
Rumsfeld also is expected to visit Russia, India and Pakistan.
The shift of the Pentagon's attention to northern Afghanistan after several weeks of concentrating airstrikes on the south of the country could provide several military and political benefits to the United States and its allies.
By helping the Northern Alliance advance, it would enable the United States to point to progress in the 24-day-old war as well as open up northern land corridors for humanitarian food relief for starving Afghans as winter approaches.
It also addresses a major concern of Pakistani President Gen. Pervez Musharraf that weeks of bombing the south are exacerbating tensions inside his country, where the war is widely unpopular.
Many Pakistanis are far more sensitive to bombing of their ethnic cousins in the south than they are to military action in the north.
Finally, officials said, an emphasis on the north might buy time for the covert U.S. effort in southern Afghanistan under which the CIA and Pakistani officials are trying to woo leaders of the Pashtuns, the dominant ethnic group in the south, away from the Taliban militia.
Until yesterday there were few signs that the U.S. strategy was succeeding.
But prominent officials said yesterday that they now think that splits may be emerging.
"We are getting accounts of changing sides, of local leaders abandoning support for the Taliban regime," British Defense Secretary Geoff Hoon told reporters at a breakfast meeting here.
He said he thinks some Pashtun leaders "are having second thoughts" about supporting the Taliban.
Musharraf hinted that he also saw the prospect of prominent Pashtun defections.
"It's not wishful thinking," he told Reuters television.
Field reports indicate that some Taliban commanders are "pleading for more supplies, including weapons, and pleading for more reinforcements," said one senior U.S. official briefed on conditions on the ground in Afghanistan.
"There are also defections among Taliban commanders, and some are are questioning" Taliban leader Mohammad Omar's "leadership and his stability."
The reports could not be confirmed independently.
Rumsfeld was more cautious on the subject.
"I have not seen personally anything that I could validate that would suggest a major shift in one direction or another," he said.
One U.S. military officer said that the Northern Alliance, which has been battling the Taliban for control of Mazar-e Sharif, is "trying to organize themselves for something coordinated before Ramadan," the Muslim holy month that begins in mid-November.
The effort, the officer said, is clearly being aided by U.S. airstrikes.
"They attrit the Taliban lines every day."
A senior defense official said that the bulk of yesterday's airstrikes by about 70 aircraft were focused on the Mazar-e Sharif area.
"The better availability of information helps immensely," the official said, referring to the presence of U.S. troops designating targets.
The official said that this emphasis on Mazar-e Sharif in particular and northern Afghanistan in general is the byproduct of the Pentagon's plan of operations, not a political decision.
"What you're seeing is a conventional side of a campaign -- you obviously take out the air defenses," the official said.
"Then you take out the military assets, so that when you get to the point where you can turn to the forces in the field, you've clearly given them nowhere to go.
That's what you're seeing when you hear people say we're on plan."
Mohammad Ashraf Nadeem, an opposition spokesman, told Reuters that some American troops already are operating a small base in northern Afghanistan.
"They have their own base there and are equipped with guns and other means of defense and wear uniforms," he said.
By helping the opposition move in the north, the United States also might take the spotlight off Kabul, where the opposition is bogged down about 25 miles north of the capital.
The United States and Britain would like to preserve that standoff by having the Northern Alliance advance against the Taliban elsewhere, and having the rebels stay out of the capital until arrangements are in place for some sort of Pashtun involvement in the future government of Afghanistan.
The Northern Alliance is comprised primarily of ethnic Tajiks and Uzbeks.
Hoon declined to answer directly when asked whether he would like to see the rebels occupy Kabul.
Rather, he said that, "We want to see the Northern Alliance advancing and taking territory from the Taliban regime."
Franks told reporters in Tashkent, the Uzbek capital, that he flew to Uzbekistan from Pakistan yesterday by crossing directly through Afghan airspace.
"We've said for awhile that we own the skies, and he wanted to make that point," a defense official said.
Franks suggested that the United States has different goals than the Afghan rebel groups.
"We have discussed whether it would in fact support our campaign objectives to move toward a variety of places," the general said.
"And we have taken a decision that says we will remain focused on our objectives, and we will retain the initiative rather than providing specific focus on a specific area.
" The United States has been clear that its two top priorities in the war are attacking the al Qaeda terrorist network in Afghanistan and its hard-core supporters in the Taliban.
Franks, the chief of the U.S. Central Command, also said the war is going according to plan.
"We want to conduct this operation on our timeline," he said.
"I think we are on that timeline."
Pentagon officials were generally more upbeat as well.
"I think that it's certain that we will defeat the Taliban," said Rear Adm. John D. Stufflebeem, deputy director of operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
"We will do it in consonance with the Northern Alliance and other opposition forces.
So it is a matter of when more than it is a matter of if."
Struck reported from Tashkent.
Staff writer Vernon Loeb contributed to this report. 
Related Links
TIME AND AGAIN, moments of hope and progress in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict are greeted by new and shocking acts of violence, meant to stop peacemaking in its tracks.
This week it happened again: Just as Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat were taking baby steps toward ending a year of warfare, radical Palestinians assassinated Israeli cabinet minister Rehavam Zeevi.
For now, this terrible act has had exactly the intended effect: Mr. Sharon has angrily suspended a promised lifting of Israeli blockades in the West Bank and Gaza, sent the army on new invasions of Palestinian territory and threatened a major offensive against Mr. Arafat's Palestinian Authority.
The execution of that offensive would deal another devastating blow to Israeli-Palestinian relations and threaten the U.S. coalition against terrorism.
Quick and decisive action must be taken in the coming days to head off the escalation of violence.
The action must begin with Mr. Arafat, who made a start by condemning the assassination, banning the Palestinian organization involved and arresting several of its members.
There is little reason to believe Mr. Arafat knew of or condoned the attack.
On the contrary, the Palestinian leader had been moving toward responding to U.S. and Israeli demands that he force compliance with a cease-fire and break with radical groups supporting terrorism.
But Mr. Arafat must go much farther: He must once and for all move against all the militants who plan and carry out terrorist attacks, and make clear to both Palestinians and Israelis that he has chosen the path of negotiation.
For his part, Mr. Sharon must leave room for a peaceful outcome.
In the past two days, he and his spokesman have returned to the tactic of mimicking President Bush's words about Osama bin Laden and the Taliban, as if they applied equally to Mr. Arafat and the Palestinian Authority.
Israel has also returned to its own practice of assassinating Palestinian militants, even though one of those killings, of the political leader of a small secular militant group, prompted the group to murder Mr. Zeevi in retaliation.
The suggestion is that an Israeli campaign to destroy the Palestinian Authority would be as appropriate and justified as the U.S. offensive in Afghanistan.
But such an Israeli campaign would simply set back, possibly for years, any move toward the real solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which, as Mr. Sharon himself acknowledged last Sunday, is negotiation leading to the creation of a Palestinian state.
Mr. Sharon threatens to mix a justified battle against terrorism with an effort to destroy the elected leadership of a legitimate national movement.
If Mr. Arafat does not decisively break with Palestinian terrorists, he should be sanctioned and isolated; if Israel is attacked, it has a right to respond against those who attack it.
But waging war against the Palestinian Authority because of the actions of a splinter group would be a terrible mistake, one with far-reaching consequences for both Israel and the United States.
2001
The Washington Post Company
Voters chose today between a former six-term mayor and a political upstart who represented the Miami relatives of Elian Gonzalez as the man to lead the city for the next four years.
Political veteran Maurice Ferre and newcomer Manny Diaz competed in a runoff after no candidate won a majority in a 10-candidate election Nov. 6.
In last week's election, Ferre, a Puerto Rican, took 8 percent more votes than Diaz, a Cuban American.
Both hoped to draw from the Cuban American voters who backed Mayor Joe Carollo, voted out of office after finishing third.
He endorsed Diaz on Monday.
"I voted for Manny Diaz.
I sympathize with Manny because he is Cuban like me," said Georgina Martinez, a 72-year-old retiree who voted at a polling site near the Orange Bowl, where turnout was heavy early in the morning.
"Ferre had his time."
Ferre, 66, was Miami's mayor from 1973 to 1985 during a period of economic growth.
Diaz, 47, has never held public office but has been a political fundraiser.
He represented Elian's Miami relatives during their unsuccessful battle with the U.S. government to keep the Cuban boy in the United States.
The runoff was shaping up as a referendum on how Miami's government handled the Elian case.
Virginia's major-party candidates for governor dueled for votes yesterday across the Washington area's conservative outer suburbs, as Democrat Mark R. Warner continued to make inroads in territory that has been crucial to Republican successes. 
Warner and GOP rival Mark L. Earley followed parallel paths through the region, both stopping in Manassas, Leesburg and other spots to mingle with voters that Republican strategists said should be solidly in their column this late in the election season.
Warner capped the day with an endorsement from Leesburg's Republican mayor, B.J. Webb.
She blasted the "negative tone" of Earley's campaign, and said his opposition to a referendum on a sales tax increase to improve transportation helped persuade her to bolt party ranks after years as a GOP activist.
Two Republican state lawmakers and a former GOP governor have done the same.
"We are dying from transportation gridlock, which is affecting every facet of every person's life," Webb said.
Of Earley, she said, "He's having a hard time connecting with people."
Republicans have long relied on support in the outer suburbs to neutralize the Democratic bastions of Arlington, Alexandria and the inner portions of Fairfax County.
Northern Virginia typically contributes one-quarter of the state's votes, more than any other region.
But its deep divisions often have kept it from being decisive in statewide elections.
Warner threatens to undo that formula.
Washington Post polling last week showed him with a 4-to-1 lead inside the Capital Beltway but also a 9 percentage point lead outside it, a region including parts of Fairfax and all of Prince William, Loudoun, Stafford and Fauquier counties -- the Republican heartland of Northern Virginia.
Earley dismissed indications that he is struggling in the outer suburbs.
"I don't think we are, and I think you'll see that on Election Day," he said.
The areas remain fundamentally conservative, concerned about schools and generally averse to new taxes.
Gov. James S. Gilmore III (R) managed a landslide win in the outer counties in 1997 on the strength of his pledge to repeal the car tax and hire 4,000 teachers.
And last year, Republican George Allen lost Northern Virginia but did well enough in the outer suburbs to blunt a strong showing for then-U.S. Sen. Charles S. Robb (D) inside the Beltway.
Allen's top issue: a tax break for education expenses.
"The key for a Republican candidate statewide is to hold down his losses in Northern Virginia," said Mark J. Rozell, a Catholic University professor of political science.
Warner's support for gun rights and the death penalty have made him more appealing to conservatives, say strategists.
And Earley's staunch opposition to the sales tax referendum, which he has promised to veto, has pushed some voters into the arms of Warner.
Despite the resistance to tax increases in the outer suburbs, voters expressed irritation at Earley's pledge to block the referendum.
If it passed, it would increase the sales tax in Northern Virginia by a half-cent, raising $130 million a year for transportation projects in the region.
Warner has projected that $900 million in projects could be funded with the sales tax increase through borrowing.
It amounts to 40 percent of his $2.25 billion transportation plan, though he says he has no position on whether such a ballot proposal should pass.
Many voters -- including some of those who oppose the tax increase -- say they want a chance to decide the issue.
"I want it to go away, and it won't go away until the people get a chance to vote on it," said James White Jr., 39, a Leesburg air traffic controller who voted for Allen last year and plans to vote for Warner on Tuesday.
"It's gotten to the point of annoyance."
The Post polls showed overwhelming support for a referendum inside the Beltway, but even outside the Beltway, it was favored nearly 2 to 1.
Warner said the issue explains much of his success in Northern Virginia.
"We're crossing a lot of the traditional lines," he said.
"Northern Virginia voters don't like to be told they shouldn't even be allowed to vote on their future, regardless of whether they support the referendum or not."
Republicans also say that the General Assembly's budget deadlock this spring has fractured their support.
The backlash against Gilmore, who is not on the ballot Tuesday, has hurt Earley.
Del. Harry J. Parrish, a Republican and former mayor of Manassas, said the city and much of Prince William County would ultimately fall in behind Earley, but he acknowledged uneasiness about Warner's gains there.
"It wouldn't have been even close if we'd had a budget," Parrish said.
At a campaign stop in Manassas, Earley told several dozen supporters in front of City Hall that his campaign is gaining momentum as Election Day nears.
He said voters would opt for experienced leadership after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11. 
Earley has nearly 14 years in state government as a senator from Chesapeake and as attorney general.
Warner, a venture capitalist and longtime Democratic Party activist, has never held public office.
Earley also stressed his plan to improve public schools and hold down taxes.
He mentioned the sales tax referendum only indirectly in those remarks.
"We're going to make sure we don't raise taxes on the people of Virginia," he said as supporters waved signs behind him. "
In fact, we're going to cut taxes so the people of Virginia can keep more of what they earn."
The message is working with some voters.
Retired teacher Jane Sowards, 64, who taught business education at Loudoun County High School for 26 years, was at first leaning toward Warner because of his emphasis on vocational education.
"Then I keep learning about the new taxes for roads, so I'm stymied because I truly believe in enhancing vocational education . . .
but I don't want higher taxes," she said.
The polling numbers suggest that the concern is widespread, with outer suburban voters believing by 2 to 1 that Warner will raise taxes.
A narrow majority agree even inside the Beltway.
The finding suggests that voters may draw a distinction between different taxes.
They turned out heavily for Gilmore to repeal the car tax, which required motorists to write a big check each year for no single purpose.
But they may be more willing to consider a sales tax increase that would be spread out over the year and would go to a specific, pressing problem -- traffic.
"Like it or not, if you don't pay taxes, you don't get services," said Ned Friece, 54, a retired federal employee from Manassas who voted for Gilmore four years ago but plans to vote for Warner on Tuesday.
Earley supporter Barry Constant, 37, agreed.
"I don't mind paying a half-a-cent sales tax if they really use them for road improvements, because we really need road improvements."
But another Earley supporter, 58-year-old Kenneth Daniel of Leesburg, said he watched similar initiatives during several years of living in Colorado.
He warned that Northern Virginians might be disappointed in the referendum even it if does happen.
"The taxes never go away," Daniel said, "and the roads never get better."
Virginia Governor's Race
U.S. scientists, spurred into action by the events of Sept. 11, have begun a concerted assault on bioterrorism, working to produce an array of new medicines that include treatments for smallpox, a safer smallpox vaccine and a painless anthrax vaccine.
At least one major drug company, Pharmacia Corp. of Peapack, N.J., has offered to let government scientists roam through the confidential libraries of millions of compounds it has synthesized to look for drugs against bioterror agents.
Other companies have signaled that they will do the same if asked.
These are unprecedented offers, since a drug company's chemical library, painstakingly assembled over decades, is one of its primary assets, to which federal scientists usually have no access.
"A lot of people would say we won World War II with the help of a mighty industrial base," said Michael Friedman, a onetime administrator at the Food and Drug Administration who was appointed days ago to coordinate the pharmaceutical industry's efforts.
"In this new war against bioterrorism, the mighty industrial power is the pharmaceutical industry."
One example of the new urgency is an initiative launched by Eli Lilly Co.
One of the company's infectious-disease experts, Gail Cassell, realized during the anthrax scare that her company had three drugs that might work as treatments for smallpox, even scarier than anthrax as a potential terrorist weapon.
In a matter of days Cassell, a Lilly vice president, tore through paperwork that normally would have taken months, put samples of the drugs on a plane and flew them to government laboratories in the Washington area to be tested against smallpox.
It's not clear yet whether the drugs will prove effective.
"We all have to think of the situation as being rather urgent," Cassell said.
"You're kind of waiting for the next shoe to drop, given the events of the last two months."
Researchers say a generation of young scientists never called upon before to defend the nation is working overtime in a push for rapid progress.
At laboratories of the National Institutes of Health, at universities and research institutes across the land, people are scrambling.
"This has been such a shock to so many people," said Carole Heilman, a division director at NIH, which is paying for much of the bioterror research.
"People aren't sleeping anymore.
Everybody is working as much as they possibly can.
Bureaucracy is not a word that's acceptable anymore."
But the campaign, for all its urgency, faces hurdles both scientific and logistical.
The kind of research now underway would normally take at least a decade before products appeared on pharmacy shelves.
Scientists are talking about getting at least some new products out the door within two years, a daunting schedule in medical research.
If that happens, it will be with considerable assistance from the nation's drug companies.
They are the only organizations in the country with the scale to move rapidly to produce pills and vials of medicine that might be needed by the billions.
The companies and their powerful lobby in Washington have been working over the past few weeks to seize the moment and rehabilitate their reputations, tarnished in recent years by controversy over drug prices and the lack of access to AIDS drugs among poor countries.
The companies have already made broad commitments to aid the government in the short term, offering free pills with a wholesale value in excess of $1 billion, as well as other help.
The question now is whether that commitment will extend over the several years it will take to build a national stockpile of next-generation medicines.
"This is a time of crisis," Friedman said.
"I think the industry is going to be very patient and going to be making a long-term commitment.
It's the right thing to do."
A good deal of basic research is already going on at nonprofit institutes that work for the government under contract, and scientists there say they are newly optimistic about the prospects of commercial help.
"The main issue is, can we get the facilities?" said John Secrist III, vice president for drug discovery and development at Southern Research Institute in Birmingham, which is looking, under federal grant, for antiviral drugs to treat smallpox.
Given the new mood in the country, he said, "if we come up with a molecule that's going to be of help, then I have no doubt that we could very rapidly convert that into doses for humans."
Many of the projects that could lead to new drugs and vaccines were underway before Sept. 11, thanks partly to an extensive commitment NIH made two years ago.
Others, like the smallpox project Eli Lilly initiated, have been started from scratch in recent weeks.
Before Sept. 11, NIH had planned to spend $93 million on next-generation bioterrorism research this budget year.
That was nearly double the amount in the prior year, but now the actual figure is likely to jump by tens of millions.
Other parts of the government, including the Department of Defense, are spending millions as well, often in cooperation with NIH.
Much of the immediate focus is on better defenses for smallpox and anthrax, two bioterror agents theoretically capable of killing millions.
Smallpox was eradicated from the United States in 1949 and from the rest of the world in 1978.
The last remaining stocks of virus are supposedly secure in two repositories in the United States and Russia.
Some terrorist groups are feared to have gotten their hands on virus samples from Russia, and if that's true, they could set off a worldwide epidemic.
Stopping such an outbreak would require mass vaccinations.
The government has a stockpile of old smallpox vaccine, but the supply is limited.
It is, moreover, a primitive product, not substantially different from the vaccine discovered by English physician Edward Jenner in 1796.
Using it involves deliberately infecting a person with a mild virus related to smallpox, which prompts the immune system to mount a defense that works against smallpox as well.
The government is about to place emergency orders for more vaccine.
However, the vaccine itself can provoke illness in some people, and a mass vaccination campaign in the United States would likely cause hundreds, if not thousands, of deaths.
In work sponsored by NIH and the Pentagon, scientists are studying the prospect of creating a modern vaccine that uses only a small, harmless part of the smallpox virus to induce immunity -- a so-called "subunit" vaccine.
The safest modern vaccines are made that way.
Anthony Fauci, head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, a unit of NIH, said progress is being made but an improved smallpox vaccine could still be years away.
A complementary near-term strategy is to come up with ways to treat vaccine-induced illness so as to minimize deaths. 
Supported by Fauci's institute, Paul W.H.I. Parren at the Scripps Research Institute in San Diego is working on creating proteins to do that.
Similar work is progressing in other labs.
Parren said his lab has obtained promising results, and animal testing may begin soon.
He estimated production of a drug could conceivably get begin within a year. "
These last events have accelerated everything," he said.
Scientists are also trying to make an improved anthrax vaccine to replace the primitive one in use today.
Prospects are brighter in the near term than for a new smallpox vaccine, in part because much of the necessary knowledge about anthrax is already in hand.
"I think that's something that could move along very rapidly," Fauci said.
Some private companies are interested.
Iomai Corp. of Gaithersburg is working on a project that would use a skin patch developed by the company to vaccinate against anthrax.
This strategy might overcome the repeated, painful injections and side effects that have prompted hundreds of U.S. soldiers to refuse anthrax vaccinations.
The company is collaborating with a government lab that has received a $300,000 federal grant but wants more.
"If we had the resources and the commitment, I think we could have a working experimental vaccine evaluated in nine months, which in the vaccine universe is very fast," said Gregory Glenn, senior vice president at Iomai.
While a new smallpox vaccine could contain an outbreak, it would not help people infected in an attack.
The disease is untreatable.
To solve that problem, labs are working on antiviral drugs to attack Variola major , the smallpox virus.
A drug called cidofovir, developed in the 1990s to treat an AIDS-related infection, has already shown promise against smallpox, but it has serious side effects.
Scientists are trying to make chemical cousins with fewer side effects. 
The drugs from Lilly are also possibilities.
If one of them should prove to work, the company is committed to a crash program to produce it, Cassell said.
"We are absolutely willing to do that," she said.
"I would just emphasize that we would do it for the good of the country, not for the good of Lilly."
Instead, the best scientists will be able to get is animal testing for effectiveness.
The drugs can, however, be tested in uninfected human volunteers to see whether they're safe to administer.
Blood markers in those tests should give researchers some idea whether a drug or vaccine is working the same way in people that it does in animals.
"I think we're going to have to settle" for such lesser proof of effectiveness, Fauci said.
"That's just the reality of the situation."
Related Links
The British government plans to release additional evidence on Wednesday implicating Osama bin Laden in the Sept. 11 attacks on the Pentagon and World Trade Center, British and U.S. officials said yesterday.
The new dossier will update a bill of particulars laid out by Prime Minister Tony Blair on Oct. 4, and officials said it will rely heavily on statements bin Laden has made in videotapes since military strikes began hitting Afghanistan.
Some of the tapes have not been publicly released, the officials said.
The new white paper will include information about past terrorist activity that bin Laden is accused of backing, the officials said.
"The case against bin Laden is airtight, but it's important to keep communicating that," a White House official said yesterday.
"Every time bin Laden speaks, his isolation only grows."
As with the previous report, the new information will come from the British government, which consulted with U.S. officials before deciding to release it.
The release is part of an effort by the United States and Britain to speak with one voice on the rationale behind the war on terrorism, in which Bush has found Blair to be his most faithful and aggressive partner.
National security adviser Condoleezza Rice has urged television networks to exercise restraint in broadcasting statements by bin Laden, contending that they stir up hate against Americans and possibly send coded messages to his followers.
Now, though, U.S. and British officials say bin Laden's statements are so extreme that they have propaganda value for the anti-terrorism coalition.
The Sunday Telegraph of London reported this weekend that a videotape seen by one of its reporters in the Middle East shows bin Laden saying that the Sept. 11 hijackers were "blessed by Allah to destroy America's economic and military landmarks."
"If avenging the killing of our people is terrorism, then history should be a witness that we are terrorists," bin Laden is quoted as saying.
"Yes, we kill their innocents, and this is legal religiously and logically. . . .
We will not stop killing them and whoever supports them."
Alastair Campbell, director of communications at 10 Downing Street, told reporters yesterday that a videotape also shows bin Laden calling it a "top duty priority" to kill Jews.
"I think it's time we gave a broad airing to some of the statements he has been making," Campbell said.
"He has made a number of self-incriminatory statements about September 11th.
He has made a number of genocidal statements against Jews and Americans."
The release of the new information is being coordinated by the Coalition Information Centers.
They are run by Bush's counselor, Karen Hughes, and White House communications director Dan Bartlett in conjunction with British officials.
The U.S. branch of the information center consists of about 25 officials, three of them British, working in the Indian Treaty Room of the Eisenhower Executive Office Building.
The British arm of the center also has about 25 employees, two of them from the United States. 
This week, the White House plans to name an official as its representative to a new Pakistan office of the information center.
Democrats are favored to win major election victories in Virginia, New Jersey and New York on Tuesday, and in more normal times they would be justified in crowing about how a possible sweep in those races might boost their prospects in next year's crucial midterm elections.
But these are hardly normal times.
After the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, many strategists think that in next year's elections voters will put a higher premium on the kind of experience, calm and confidence exhibited by New York Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani (R).
That could work to the benefit of incumbents, but there is no way to know that from Tuesday's voting because there are no incumbents on the ballot in the major races.
The campaigns -- gubernatorial races in Virginia and New Jersey and a mayoral race in New York to select Giuliani's successor -- have been so divorced from the national focus on terrorism that they may be even less reflective of national trends than usual.
Still there may be some clues to the future coming out of the results, and party strategists already are trying to determine what those lessons learned might be.
As one GOP strategist put it, "If we lose both races [Virginia and New Jersey] by double digits, I'd say let's be honest about what broader factors we ought to be concerned about that could be factors in 2002."
One thing both parties will be measuring is the potency of the GOP's anti-tax message, which appears to have lost strength at a time when voters are looking to government to make airports safer, protect against outbreaks of anthrax and head off future terrorist attacks.
President Bush's major domestic achievement is a $1.3 trillion tax cut, and he is pushing additional reductions to stimulate the economy.
Democrats anticipate a renewed clash on this issue next year.
Another is the power of negative campaigns, which so far have not shown much ability to move voters in New Jersey or Virginia.
Partisan debate has not been ruled out of bounds and negative ads will not disappear because of the war on terrorism, but some strategists said candidates could pay a higher price for petty partisanship or harshly negative campaigning than in the past.
A third question some Republicans are asking is whether their candidates have found a strong rationale for their candidacies that fits the current mood.
In next year's races for governor, where Republicans already are worried about losses because of recent or pending retirements in key states, the Virginia and New Jersey campaigns may prove instructive.
But the events of Sept. 11 will force candidates in both parties to rethink their campaign agendas.
There is good reason to be cautious about overinterpreting Tuesday's elections.
Eight years ago, Republican victories in Virginia, New Jersey and New York, along with the Los Angeles mayor's race, foreshadowed dissatisfaction with President Bill Clinton and helped propel the GOP to its 1994 takeovers of the House and Senate.
But this year's elections have been in no way a referendum on Bush or the Congress, both of which are enjoying big boosts in popularity.
"September 11 creates a stage where incumbents have enormous opportunities to prove themselves," said Geoff Garin, a Democratic pollster.
"There's a lot of evidence that, in terms of national politics, this has produced a rally around not just President Bush but around all incumbents in Washington.
People believe that September 11 has brought out the best in everybody in the political system."
It is clear the war on terrorism has changed public perceptions of the president and enhanced his image, particularly with independent and swing voters.
Democrats have been careful to avoid direct criticism of the president.
Democratic National Committee Chairman Terry McAuliffe routinely describes Bush as "the flag," and the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee has refrained from attacking Bush even in its direct mail appeals.
If Bush's popularity holds, that could help Republicans next year, particularly in races for the House and Senate.
But Tuesday's contests suggest that 90 percent approval ratings do not automatically translate to GOP candidates.
Bush has chosen not to test his popularity this fall, declining to campaign for either Mark Earley, the GOP candidate for governor of Virginia, or Bret Schundler, the Republican candidate for governor of New Jersey, to concentrate on the war.
Next year he is likely to be much more directly involved on behalf of candidates, but depending on the conduct of the military campaign, this could present problems.
"Sometimes a president's popularity can be converted into political capital," said Ken Khachigian, a California GOP strategist.
"But he'll have to calculate very carefully how to use that coin.
There's a mystique to the presidency and you can't squander it."
Bush's strength depends on progress in the military campaign against Osama bin Laden's terrorist network and the Taliban regime in Afghanistan, and on how effectively the government deals with the threat of further terrorist attacks.
Polls show that people believe it will take considerable time to accomplish those objectives, but strategists said Bush will have to show clear successes on both fronts to maintain strong public support.
Both the domestic and international aspects of the war initially play to Republican advantage, given the party's historic image as pro-defense and pro-law enforcement.
Democrats argue that the war on terrorism, like the war on drugs, has no great partisan impact on voters.
Some polls have shown an initial boost for the GOP since Sept. 11, and an agenda dominated by those issues would be favorable to Republicans.
What worries Republicans most is the threat of an extended recession, the very problem that sunk Bush's father after the Persian Gulf War.
Bush has been more responsive to the economy than was his father, but GOP strategists fear their candidates could be running next year with terrorism issues less dominant than they are today but the economy still in trouble.
"People are really worried about it [the economy]," said Tim Hibbits, an Oregon-based independent pollster.
"People are behaving as if they expect serious trouble."
But he said the current slump is different from the recession of a decade ago. "
Then [voters] were angry," he said.
"That's when you got a wave of term limits being passed.
Now people perceive a broader, longer downturn, and they are looking to government for help.
"
Strategists in both parties are trying to determine how Sept. 11 may affect the qualities voters are looking for in candidates.
Linda DiVall, a Republican pollster, said the new climate favors people with experience, either in government, business or elsewhere, that demonstrates the capacity to build coalitions and make things work more than outsiders like "the Ross Perot type who exudes the mentality of an excitable charger who will take on the system."
Ed Sarpolus, a Michigan-based Democratic pollster, said, "What I see is that Giuliani is now the picture of what people want to see in leadership.
He gives you a sense of security and honesty all at once."
Others believe the heroism of firefighters, police and rescue workers could bring working or middle-class candidates into races particularly at the local level.
Political strategists and pollsters agree that the aftermath of Sept. 11 already has reshaped American politics in some significant ways, producing newfound confidence in government, driving the weakened economy into recession and putting national and domestic security at the forefront of the issue agenda.
All of these changes are likely to shape next year's elections, which could alter the partisan balance of power in Washington.
But so far, the changes have had more impact on the culture of politics than on the relative strength of either political party.
Elaine Kamarck, a Harvard professor and Democratic strategist, said the changes "are so big and transforming [that] the new world is going to affect both parties equally."
Former Clinton White House chief of staff Leon E. Panetta said, "This is no longer about partisan trench warfare, which has been dominant for 20 years.
Politics is no longer about abortion or gun control or even the minimum wage.
It really is about personal security and survival.
This is now a time of bipartisanship and seeking solutions."
That doesn't mean the absence of partisanship or vigorous debate, as congressional fights over aviation security and economic stimulus have shown.
Nor does it mean the disappearance of issues such as education, health care, prescription drugs or the future of Social Security.
But for now all politics will play out under altered rules of engagement.
Whether that is the case a year from now is only a guess.
Matthew Dowd, one of Bush's political advisers, said Sept. 11 "could be a defining moment that changes how people view politics, the parties and all that, but that's going to depend on the outcome" of the war and efforts to revive the economy.
He added, "The tenor of campaigns will change to a degree and that's probably a lesson learned out of the races this year."
Related Links
Feb. 26 ?
Japan and South Korea are trying to minimize the rift that they see left behind by President Bush's harsh rhetoric toward North Korea during his trip to Asia last week.
Analysts here say Bush's comments, in which he castigated the North Korean leader, Kim Jong Il, and repeated his judgment that the government is "evil," have further impaired prospects of renewed cooperation by Pyongyang.
North Korea has reacted angrily to Bush's statements, calling the U.S. president the "kingpin of terrorism" and describing his trip a "war junket."
But officials in Tokyo and Seoul have seized upon the invitation repeated by Bush to hold talks with Pyongyang as evidence the U.S. administration is less antagonistic toward North Korea than the president's words suggest.
A spokesman for the presidential Blue House in Seoul said Bush's assurance that the United States does not intend to invade North Korea is "a big help in dispelling our worries."
A spokesman for the Japanese Foreign Ministry said today that Tokyo has "a sincere hope dialogue will be resumed" between the United States and North Korea.
But President Kim Dae Jung of South Korea acknowledged Monday that Bush's stance had increased tensions to a "critical" point.
After the president's State of the Union address on Jan. 29 labeling North Korea, Iran and Iraq an "axis of evil," Kim said, "We had faced a critical moment.
North Korea must have felt a great threat after President Bush's axis of evil remarks.
"
"A war can break out if two parties reject each other," Kim told a group of government and civic leaders in Seoul.
Seoul, whose residents make up nearly half the population of South Korea, is 34 miles from the border with North Korea and a vulnerable missile target if war were to break out.
Bush's tough tone toward North Korea produced anti-American demonstrations in Seoul by protesters who support Kim Dae Jung's "sunshine policy" of seeking reconciliation with the North.
Howard H. Baker Jr., the U.S. ambassador to Japan, met with Japanese and American reporters this week to promote a positive view of the president's Asian trip.
"I think clearly he got their attention," Baker said today of Bush's remarks on North Korea.
"I think they're thinking about it.
They don't like it, but I think they're thinking about it.
They may be on the brink of deciding well, you know, we're about to mess up again and we're about to lose what we thought we had advanced.
I think he'll make them focus on the importance of addressing these issues.
I think the president realized his objective."
The North Korean reaction came not only from the usual voice, the Korean Central News Agency, but also in a weightier statement from the Foreign Ministry.
The statement, issued as Bush ended his trip, complained that the president's comments were "an insult to the national feelings of the Korean people" and "outrageously slandered" the country.
Bush, in remarks before and during his visit to Seoul last Wednesday, called the North Korean government "despotic," repeated his demands that Pyongyang pull back its weapons from the border, criticized Kim Jong Il as a man without "a good heart," and ? after peering through bulletproof glass toward the North, where a museum holds axes used to kill two U.S. servicemen 25 years ago ?
mused, "No wonder I think they're evil."
Despite Bush's insistence that he is open to talks with Pyongyang and supports Kim Dae Jung's conciliatory efforts, his remarks were an embarrassing setback to the policies that won the South Korean president a Nobel Peace Prize.
Critics of Bush say he has ensured there will be little progress by personally criticizing Kim Jong Il, an affront to a country that has little except its swollen pride.
Former president Jimmy Carter called Bush's approach "overly simplistic and counterproductive."
In Atlanta last week, Carter said, "I think it will take years before we can repair the damage done by that statement."
Commentaries in the press here have generally agreed. "
The Bush administration is trying to play the role of 'bad cop,' " foreign affairs columnist Yoichi Funabashi wrote in the daily Asahi Shimbun. "
But America's allies will not follow a United States which takes the law into its own hands as the guardian of virtue in controlling evil."
Bush "says he is willing to talk to the North, but he is not willing to make it a priority," said Ji Yeon Yuh, an assistant professor of history at Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill., writing in the Daily Yomiuri newspaper.
"When Bush labeled North Korea part of an axis of evil, he heightened the potential for military conflict.
The losers in any such conflict would be the Korean people.
"
"If the North turns a deaf ear to dialogue proposals, it would be all but impossible to predict what actions President Bush will take," said Sah Dong Seok, political editor of the Korea Times in Seoul.
Baker, while playing down the threat posed by the Bush administration, acknowledged that he worried about miscalculation.
"Usually great conflicts start by accident, and I fear that there is some sort of enormous military strength in North Korea," Baker said today while meeting reporters.
"You've got an unstable domestic situation there.
You've got uncertain leadership there.
That is the most dangerous part of the relationship."
Special correspondent Akiko Yamamoto contributed to this report.
U.S. sky marshals on a flight from Pittsburgh to Reagan National Airport suddenly ordered a plane to land at Dulles International Airport yesterday, after a passenger got up and started walking toward the cockpit, authorities said.
The passenger, Raho N. Ortiz, 33, refused to follow a new federal rule requiring passengers to remain seated in the last half-hour of an approach to National, said Chris Murray, an FBI spokesman.
About 15 minutes before the plane was to land at National, Ortiz got out of his seat and started walking briskly toward the front of the plane, where a restroom and cockpit are, said David Castelveter, a spokesman for Arlington-based US Airways.
As Ortiz neared the cockpit, a sky marshal in plainclothes seated near the front yelled, 'Stop!'
said passenger Mike Cannon, of Arlington.
Flight attendants had announced the ban on getting up during the last half-hour of the flight, passengers said.
After the sky marshals had Ortiz handcuffed on the ground, the marshals ordered the other 106 passengers to put their hands behind their heads and later on the seats in front of them for the rest of the trip, several passengers said.
Some said they briefly thought that the plane was being hijacked and panicked.
The plane, a nearly full Airbus A319, remained at Dulles rather than following the usual pattern of being allowed to continue on to National after a diversion, said Tom Sullivan, a spokesman for the Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority, which runs both airports.
Ortiz, a lawyer, works for the Environmental Protection Agency, his mother said last night.
When the plane landed at Dulles shortly after 5 p.m., the FBI arrested him on a charge of interfering with a flight crew.
By 8:30 p.m., the FBI had dropped the federal charge and released Ortiz, Murray said.
However, the Airports Authority police issued a summons ordering Ortiz to appear in court in Loudoun County to answer a charge of misdemeanor drug possession in connection with the alleged possession of marijuana, according to an Airports Authority spokesman.
It was the first time that U.S. sky marshals diverted a US Airways flight, Castelveter said.
Federal Aviation Administration officials refuse to discuss the sky marshal program in detail, but sources say marshals are aboard all flights into and out of National.
Laura Brown, an FAA spokeswoman, could not confirm whether yesterday's was the first flight diverted by sky marshals.
Since flights resumed service to National after Sept. 11, some flights bound for that airport have been rerouted to Dulles.
But in most cases, the cause was improper procedures by the pilot, Brown said.
Flight 969 took off from Pittsburgh International Airport at 4:19 p.m. and was due at National at 5:20 p.m.
Ortiz left his seat shortly after 5 p.m.
Authorities said he lives in Northeast Washington, but his mother said he lives in San Francisco, where he works for the EPA.
Telephone calls to an EPA spokesman went unanswered last night.
Agnes Ortiz said her son is not a terrorist. "
No way, he's Navajo -- Native American -- from this country.
We were here before all you people," she said.
Staff writers Michael Laris and Emily Wax and researcher Bobbye Pratt contributed to this report.
Baltimore Ravens tailback Jamal Lewis has been suspended four games by the NFL for violating its substance and alcohol abuse policy, a league source confirmed yesterday.
Even though Lewis is out for the season with a knee injury, the suspension began Friday and could end Dec. 17.
Lewis, who is on injured reserve, will miss four game checks, or about $233,000, and is not allowed to have any contact with the team.
The ruling, first reported yesterday by the Baltimore Sun, indicated this is the second time Lewis has violated the policy.
In a statement, the Ravens said they endorse the policy and added: "We support and help Jamal through this process."
The NFL does not disclose details of the substance-abuse violations and Lewis's agent, Mitch Frankel, did not respond to a phone message. 
Team sources said it was much too early to speculate about possibly drafting or trading for another back.
In his rookie season last year, Lewis rushed for a team-record 1,364 yards and was a major factor in the Ravens' Super Bowl win over the New York Giants.
As the fifth pick in the 2000 draft, Lewis signed a six-year contract worth about $35 million if all provisions are met.
Lewis suffered his injury Aug. 8 during a routine play near the end of a training camp practice.
If his rehabilitation continues on pace, he should be at full strength by the start of training camp next season.
The Ravens' tailback trouble continued after his injury. 
The Ravens signed free agent Terry Allen almost immediately to replace Lewis, and he led a modest ground attack with 357 yards on 100 carries before suffering an ankle sprain that sidelined him for two games.
When he returned Monday night against the Tennessee Titans, he broke a bone in his left hand on his first carry.
He will miss four to six weeks.
Allen's backup, Jason Brookins, has been effective running inside and had a 25-yard run against the Titans late in the fourth quarter that helped produce a 16-10 victory.
Brookins will open at tailback today against the Cleveland Browns at PSINet Stadium, with Obafemi Ayanbadejo and special teams standout Moe Williams available on long-yardage situations.
Anyone who's been on Chesapeake Bay knows the scene: Flat calm, hot sun, no wind.
It happens in July and August and occasionally in spring or fall.
Whoever is out there suffers -- even the top ocean racers in the world.
Eight entries in the Volvo Ocean Race got a rude introduction to baking on the bay yesterday as winds died and boats slowed to a crawl after entering the Chesapeake on the 875-mile leg from Miami to Baltimore.
The zephyrs left leg leaders News Corp, Amer Sports One, Assa Abloy and illbruck fighting for inches, waiting for a sea breeze.
"It's going to be a long, tense day," News Corp skipper Jez Fanstone reported by e-mail, "as we make our way slowly up Chesapeake Bay in a dying breeze.
Fifteen minutes ago Amer Sports One closed to within three boat lengths as they brought up the last of the old wind.
"With 100 miles to go anything can happen in these fickle conditions.
I don't think I've ever been in a more intense yacht race."
By nightfall, race organizers were considering shortening the course by 20 miles and staging the finish at Chesapeake Bay Bridge instead of off Fort McHenry in Baltimore's Inner Harbor.
Even so, said spokesman Mark Howell, "We could be looking at a 1 a.m. finish.
The wind is up and down like a yo-yo."
The fluky breezes helped Assa Abloy, which is second in the overall standings behind illbruck.
Assa was more than 20 miles behind the lead trio but closed the gap and eventually passed illbruck by slipping up the Eastern Shore of Virginia while the leaders languished in the middle of the Bay.
"We just hugged the shore and stayed in the breeze while the others were in the center of the Bay," said tactician Chris Larson of Annapolis, who phoned from Assa in late afternoon.
"Then we sailed right by illbruck in the light stuff."
As darkness fell, Assa was in 10 knots of southerly wind, a half-mile ahead of illbruck near Point Lookout, with leader News Corp five miles ahead and Amer Sports One in second place, halfway between the two.
"The wind shut off several times during the day," said exhausted skipper John Kostecki on illbruck, which went from first place to fourth.
"The last time it did, we got caught.
It's typical Chesapeake conditions.
There's not a lot you can do."
When Hamid Karzai returned to Afghanistan to oppose the Taliban early last month and press for a new government, it was a move of potential significance because he and his tribe have played such a central role in Afghan history, analysts said yesterday.
Karzai is the leader of an influential clan of the Pashtuns, Afghanistan's long-dominant ethnic group, they said.
His clan is especially strong in and around Kandahar, the southern city that is the center of Taliban power.
Analysts said this explains why his firefight on Thursday with Taliban forces is different from earlier clashes between the Taliban and opposition commanders in the Pashtun belt of southern Afghanistan.
Unlike Abdul Haq, a Pashtun warlord who was captured and executed by the Taliban last week, Karzai has a natural following and this may have helped him avoid capture, they said.
"If Karzai could form a political base that can be mobilized in the heartland of the Taliban, it would be highly significant," said Barnett R. Rubin of the Center on International Cooperation of New York University.
"The leadership he represents has been so broken down, and it will be very difficult to revive it," Rubin said.
"But he represents a continuity with Afghanistan's past, and that has definite power."
Karzai was selected as leader of the Popalzai clan in 1999, after the previous chief, his father, was assassinated in Pakistan.
The Popalzais are leaders of the Durrani tribe, which established the first Afghan empire in the 1760s, with its capital in Kandahar.
The descendants of those rulers led Afghanistan almost without interruption until 1973, when King Mohammed Zahir Shah was deposed by his cousin.
The Durranis and another sub-group, the Ghilzais, together make up much of the ethnic Pashtun belt in southern and eastern Afghanistan that is key to unseating the Taliban.
The Taliban is largely Pashtun -- an ancient group that traces its genealogy back to a companion of the prophet Muhammad -- and analysts say any future Afghan government will have to include substantial Pashtun representation to be stable.
Karzai, who was a deputy minister in the Afghan government that was formed in the early 1990s after the withdrawal of Soviet forces, could offer some of that stability, analysts said.
But Karzai comes with handicaps, too.
Many of the educated, upper- and middle-class Afghans whom he represents have been killed or exiled in two decades of civil wars, and have been eclipsed by the mullahs and clerics.
The religious rulers of the Taliban have always regarded the old ruling elites as especially dangerous rivals, and have been ruthless in undermining them and turning villagers against them.
Also, Karzai has lived since the mid-1990s in Pakistan and traveled often to the United States, something that could cause him difficulty now, Rubin said.
Although he maintained his ties better than most Afghans who left the country, he said, his challenge in Afghanistan is stark. "
His group has to grow, or it will die," Rubin said.
According to Omar Samad, a commentator with the independent Afghan Information Center in Washington, Karzai has been engaging in traditional Afghan politics since he returned to the country on Oct. 8 by meeting with local elders over tea.
Karzai is promoting the calling of a national gathering, or loya jirga , that would be led by the exiled king, who has been living in Rome since 1973.
Samad said that form of governing is radically different from the Taliban approach, which is rooted in Islam and gives power to the mullahs.
He said that most members of the Taliban come from poor and uneducated families that had little influence in the traditional social and economic structure of Afghanistan, and that many of them lost their fathers during the wars.
As refugees in Pakistan, most were brought up in religious schools, or madrassahs, and religious ties became more important than traditional tribal ones.
"The Karzai family is very important in Kandahar, but the city today is not the same as two months ago or certainly 10 years ago," Samad said.
"The elite has left, and what remains in Kandahar is the poorest people, the least informed and the easiest to manipulate.
This makes the effort even more difficult."
But Karzai does have the benefit of tradition and influence -- his father was the head of the important Kandahar shura, or governing body, in the early 1990s -- and Karzai knows how to work with village leaders.
While analysts emphasize the importance of ethnic, tribal and clan loyalties in Afghanistan, some Afghan figures say that emphasis is part of what has been destroying the country for years.
Hamid Karzai's brother, Qayum Karzai, who lives in the Washington area, says that Pakistan in particular has sought to divide Afghanistan by insisting that Pashtuns must rule.
"Any patriotic Afghan will tell you that the struggle is not based on ethnicity or tribal affiliation but, instead, on the principle of Afghan independence," Qayum Karzai said.
"If anybody resorts to this Pashtun or non-Pashtun formula, it is designed to poison the resistance movement."
Pakistan also has a large Pashtun population, and has been historically worried that it might try to leave Pakistan to form a greater "Pashtunistan" with Afghan Pashtuns.
The Afghan royal family has long been associated with the idea, and the Afghan leader who deposed Zahir Shah, Mohammed Daoud, actively encouraged Pakistani Pashtuns to think in those terms.
Pakistani leaders have never forgotten that.
Karzai and other tribal leaders like him generally join resistance groups associated with the royal family and so have not been favorites of Pakistan, which has funded and supported the fundamentalist Islamic groups.
Related Links
The Pentagon and its allies moved yesterday to concentrate broad military power in northern Afghanistan and set the stage for a ground offensive by anti-Taliban rebels, committing new U.S. troops and aircraft and pledging continued heavy bombing of front-line Taliban forces.
A senior defense official said the Pentagon has ordered the deployment of a JSTARS surveillance aircraft capable of tracking enemy movements across hundreds of miles of battlefield, while Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said he wanted the number of U.S. Special Forces assisting the opposition Northern Alliance increased by three to four times "as soon as humanly possible."
Intensified U.S. bombing of Taliban positions north of Kabul -- including the use of a B-52 bomber for the first time on such positions -- has given the Northern Alliance hope that it can soon march on Kabul, the capital, senior alliance officials and commanders said.
"With effective, intense bombing of the front lines, it would be a matter of days to break through," Abdullah, the alliance's foreign affairs chief, told reporters in the village of Jabal Saraj in northern Afghanistan.
He said this applies to "any front line" between the Taliban and the alliance.
Abdullah said yesterday's airstrikes near alliance lines north of Kabul were "very effective" and that heavy airstrikes since Saturday had destroyed at least 15 Taliban tanks.
U.S. airstrikes resumed before dawn Friday.
The roar of jets could be heard over the Shomali Plain starting just before 4 a.m. and they continued to fly into the morning.
Reports of damage were not immediately available.
Abdurrab Rasul Sayyaf, a senior member of the alliance's leadership council, said an advance on Kabul could be launched before a renewed alliance assault on Mazar-e Sharif, a strategic northern city held by Taliban forces.
"If you want to hit your enemy, you should hit him on the head," Sayyaf said.
Azerbaijan and Armenia, meanwhile, both offered the United States assistance in its war on terrorism, including overflight rights for U.S. military planes.
Such rights would provide U.S. warplanes with a new corridor into Afghanistan from bases in Europe and Turkey.
In addition, the Bush administration pressed Congress to lift sanctions on cooperation with Azerbaijan to permit use of an air base in Azerbaijan for operations over Afghanistan.
Turkey announced that it would dispatch 90 special forces troops to help train the Northern Alliance, making it the third NATO member to commit ground troops to the war.
The move came days after Britain announced that it was sending all its aircraft carriers and 4,200 special forces troops to the region.
U.S. Marines lifted off the USS Peleliu yesterday in three helicopters on an undisclosed support mission, according to a media pool report from the amphibious assault ship in the Arabian Sea.
The Pentagon has taken reporters to the Peleliu but imposed strict limits on what they can report and released no information about specific operations.
"In other American wars, enemy commanders have come to doubt the wisdom of taking on the strength and power of this nation and the resolve of her people," Rumsfeld said.
"I expect that somewhere in a cave in Afghanistan there is a terrorist leader who is at this moment considering precisely the same thing."
Briefing reporters at the Pentagon
, Rumsfeld said that the presence of U.S. Special Forces on the ground in a liaison role with the Northern Alliance has greatly enhanced the U.S. military's ability to designate targets and attack Taliban forces from the air.
He said 80 percent of all sorties being flown are in support of opposition forces in the north.
Rumsfeld expressed frustration that more U.S. Special Forces are not already on the ground but said that on more than one occasion heavy Taliban ground fire kept troops from being deployed from helicopters.
"But we have a number of teams cocked and ready to go; it's just a matter of having the right kind of equipment to get them there in the landing zones in places where it's possible to get in and get out, and we expect that to happen -- I've expected it to happen every day, and I'm sure it will in the days immediately ahead," Rumsfeld said.
The use of B-52 bombers to drop cluster bombs on Taliban forces, Rumsfeld said, is "to try to kill them . . .
to be perfectly blunt."
A senior defense official confirmed that a JSTARS surveillance aircraft -- the name stands for Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System -- and an experimental Global Hawk unmanned surveillance drone had been moved to the region and would soon be flying missions over Afghanistan.
The deployment of JSTARS signals that a major ground engagement is imminent, defense analysts said.
"It basically gives you continuous surveillance of moving ground targets over a wide area," said John Pike, director of Globalsecurity.org, a defense consulting company.
On the northern plains surrounding Mazar-e Sharif, he said, "It would make it very difficult for the Taliban to organize counterattacks."
The Global Hawk, which has never been flown in combat, is a high-altitude drone with a wingspan longer than a Boeing 737.
It can stay aloft for 36 hours and carry a load of sensitive battlefield sensors at an altitude of 65,000 feet. "
With the cameras, we can identify targets out to 30 miles, and the radar is effective to over a hundred miles," a senior defense official said.
National security adviser Condoleezza Rice, meanwhile, said the United States "can't afford to have a pause" in the bombing campaign, as some Islamic governments have suggested, during the Muslim holy month of Ramadan that begins in less than two weeks.
"We think that the best thing that we can do for the world, for all of the allies in the coalition, whether they are Muslim or not, is to make certain that this war on terrorism succeeds.
And that means we have to finish the mission," Rice told reporters.
In Afghanistan, Northern Alliance officials said that logistical problems and the failure of opposition political leaders to form an interim government to replace the Taliban would not deter the launching of an offensive.
The Pentagon delayed heavy bombing in support of the Northern Alliance for the first few weeks of the war, hoping that an interim government including not only the three ethnic minorities that comprise the alliance leadership but also ethnic Pashtuns in the south could be created first.
With that political track flagging, the Pentagon has moved aggressively over the past week to step up its support for the alliance.
" Inshallah [God willing], you will see it soon," said Sayyaf, whose political party fields hundreds of fighters on a portion of the front north of Kabul.
"I can't say exactly when, but it is near.
When we go to Kabul, within a week the schedule for a transitional government will be made."
U.S. bombs rained down on Taliban targets in three villages near the front north of Kabul on Wednesday, according to Abdul Nasir, a senior official in the alliance's defense ministry.
He said the targets were identified to the U.S. military by alliance officers.
At the abandoned village of Rabat, one of the alliance's southernmost positions near the main road to Kabul, Mohammad Mustafa, the commander of an artillery battalion, also applauded yesterday's airstrikes.
He said he watched one Taliban tank and a "central base" being destroyed.
"They are weakened, and their morale is declining," he said.
Mustafa said that on the front north of Kabul, Taliban fighters and their allies are manning three lines of defense, each of which has about 3,000 fighters.
Other estimates put total Taliban strength on the front at 6,000 to 8,000 fighters.
Asked at a news conference whether the Northern Alliance is capable of undertaking an offensive, given its shortages of fuel, tanks, heavy artillery and other equipment, Abdullah said alliance fighters were used to battling against the odds.
"We do have certain logistical problems, but that does not disable us from launching an effective offensive against the Taliban," he said.
"I would not say we have everything which is required.
It is not possible to get whatever we need at this time, because of the weather and logistics."
However, he said, "we have been trained to do the job with whatever we have."
Abdullah said there has been little activity in recent days on the front south of Mazar-e Sharif, but that U.S. airstrikes caused considerable damage to Taliban positions in the city of Kunduz.
There, he said, a Taliban air base and an ammunition depot were hit.
The attacks, combined with the defection of Taliban supporters north of Kunduz, forced Taliban commanders to order the evacuation of other ammunition stocks, he said.
With Azerbaijan and Armenia offering assistance in the war, the Bush administration pushed to have a House-Senate conference committee approve legislation authorizing the president to waive sanctions against Azerbaijan to permit immediate use of an air base there.
"There is some urgency to try to get that waiver authority," an administration official said, adding that the base would be used for resupply operations or as "backup capability" to bases in Uzbekistan or Pakistan.
The administration has been engaged in diplomacy with both Armenia and Azerbaijan, neighbors and longtime foes.
On Tuesday, President Bush called President Heydar Aliyev of Azerbaijan and President Robert Kocharian of Armenia to discuss the war.
In addition, Armenia's foreign minister was in Washington and a State Department envoy for negotiating an end to the two countries' dispute over Nagorno-Karabakh was in the region.
As it pushed these issues on Capitol Hill, the Bush administration also kicked off its new public diplomacy campaign yesterday by announcing a series of major meetings and speeches Bush would deliver over the next 10 days.
The flurry of activity, and the public announcements, are products of the new Coalition Information Centers -- or CIC as it has quickly been dubbed in the White House -- established this week in Washington and London to provide rapid and coordinated information on the U.S. and coalition anti-terrorism effort.
Concerned that they were losing the battle for international public opinion, especially in the Islamic world, senior aides to Bush and British Prime Minister Tony Blair decided last week to set up the offices.
A third center, staffed by U.S. and British officials, is to open in Islamabad, Pakistan, to provide instant rebuttal to Taliban allegations that the bombings are causing massive collateral damage and civilian deaths in Afghanistan.
Branigin reported from Jabal Saraj.
Staff writers Karen DeYoung, Vernon Loeb and Thomas E. Ricks contributed to this report. 
Related Links
A week spent talking about the need to play hard early in games and bounce back from nasty losses ended with the Washington Capitals finally doing both.
The Capitals dominated Anaheim in the first period last night and controlled the duration of the game, subduing the Mighty Ducks, 4-1, before 17,298 at MCI Center.
Washington won for just the second time in 10 games and played its most complete hockey this month, rebounding from successive defeats to Ottawa and Philadelphia during which the club was outscored 16-5.
Another loss would have been devastating; the impetus for victory came early.
The Capitals scored first for just the sixth time this season and were dedicated to their defensive system for the remainder of the contest, a rarity the last few weeks.
"We had a great meeting today and were told to relax and enjoy ourselves," winger Chris Simon (one goal) said.
"Basically, just shut up and play the game.
We know what we have to do, we're an experienced team and this is a step in the right direction tonight.
Hopefully, a couple of months from now we'll look back and laugh at the way we played early in the year."
The Capitals would not relinquish all hopes of a victory in the first five minutes last night, that much was certain after the game's first shift.
There was noticeably more vigor and effort from the club after getting outscored 8-1 in the first period of their last two humbling losses (23-13 on the season), a development personified by Peter Bondra's charge to the crease that resulted in the first power play of the game.
Washington worked the puck smoothly on the power play.
Winger Ulf Dahlen capped the nice work by slipping a backhander to the net which Jaromir Jagr pushed into the vacant side of the net three minutes in.
Matt Pettinger made it 2-0 five minutes later, scorching the puck past Jean-Sebastien Giguere's glove, striking the net where the crossbar and post intersect.
Pettinger had scored for the second time in three games after failing to score in his first 18 NHL contests.
That outburst thrust him to sixth on the team in goals, a reflection of the lack of balanced production this season.
The Ducks, coming off a tough loss at Columbus on Friday night, converted their only real scoring chance of the period, however, and made a game of it.
Capitals center Andrei Nikolishin fanned on a skipping rebound in the slot with the team playing four-on-four and Anaheim raced down the ice on a three-on-two.
Samuel Pahlsson took a pass and whisked a low shot into the near side; goaltender Olaf Kolzig never saw the shot through traffic.
Washington's onslaught continued in the second period, but the scoring stalled.
Hard work begot more power-play opportunities: The Capitals enjoyed the game's first five power plays -- they entered last night in an 0-for-13 rut -- including a five-on-three for 73 seconds midway through the game.
That resulted in no goals and just two shots on goal.
The Capitals were vulnerable -- they have been a fragile team lately with little confidence -- and needed an insurance goal before the second intermission.
Center Adam Oates provided that, notching his first goal since March 7, a span of 33 games, and finishing with four points.
Ulf Dahlen ripped a no-look pass through the crease on the power play and Oates slammed it in from the far post late in the period.
Oates's best work, however, was yet to come.
Anaheim had a two-man advantage for 74 seconds as the second period expired.
Oates and defensemen Sylvain Cote and Frantisek Kucera were the on the ice for the entire span, using smarts and hustle to secure Washington's lead.
"The penalty killing was excellent," Coach Ron Wilson said.
"We killed of off a five-on-three and a number of penalties.
They're turning point kills.
"Kolzig was brilliant as well, swatting away Paul Kariya's shot while on his stomach, one of several nimble reaction saves he produced in the clutch.
"That was great," Kolzig said.
"We got away from [their defensive system] and I didn't know if we could turn it around just like that after being humbled the way we were the last two games.
I thought it might take the four days [until the next game] to get the system back, but the guys showed it's our heads.
We just need to apply it and that's what we did tonight."
Capitals Notes: Veteran defenseman Joe Reekie, off to a slow start, was a healthy scratch last night despite a slew of key injuries.
Wilson opted to dress career minor leaguer Dean Melanson and Kucera, a journeyman playing just his second game since being summoned from the Czech League.
Defenseman Brendan Witt did not return from western Canada, where he had attended a funeral, in time for the game.
Defenseman Ken Klee returned after missing three games with a rib injury. . .
Wingers Chris Corrinet and Dmitri Khristich were also scratched.
Khristich cleared waivers yesterday -- as expected given his ineffective play and $3.2 million salary.
The Capitals do not plan to send Khristich to the minors but hoped another team might gamble on him. . . .
Sources said the Capitals have no trades brewing for a defenseman and do not anticipate being able to acquire someone of quality at that position. . . .
Rookie enforcer Stephen Peat had the finest bout of his young NHL career last night, pounding Kevin Sawyer with a flurry of lefts in the first period, enlivening the crowd and Washington's bench.
Pakistan's armed forces dispatched troops to a remote southern region bordering Afghanistan to investigate local reports that a U.S. military helicopter had crashed there early this morning, but U.S. and Pakistani officials said they had no information about a downed chopper.
Pakistani military officials said the helicopter was reported to have crashed about 35 miles from the Afghan border while en route to an air base in the city of Dalbandin that is one of three Pakistani military facilities used by U.S. forces for logistical and rescue operations.
The officials said their reports did not identify the type of helicopter or the number of people aboard.
The local reports could not be independently verified.
The Pentagon issued a statement today saying that it had "received no report of a U.S. military helicopter going down over Pakistan or Afghanistan."
Pakistan's Foreign Ministry said that it had no independent verification of a helicopter crash.
"What we have found out so far is that there has been no such incident," said Pakistani military spokesman Maj.
Gen. Rashid Qureshi.
But military officials in the area, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said they were certain that a helicopter had gone down near the Afghan border.
They said they could not confirm that the helicopter belonged to the U.S. military, but they did not know of any Pakistani military helicopters operating in the area early this morning.
The Afghan Islamic Press, a Pakistan-based news agency that is close to Afghanistan's ruling Taliban militia, reported today that a U.S. helicopter involved in airstrikes against Afghanistan had crashed near the Pakistani town of Aminabad, about 20 miles from Dalbandin.
On Friday, a U.S. helicopter on a Special Forces mission in northern Afghanistan was forced down by bad weather, but the crew was rescued by a second helicopter on the same mission, Pentagon officials said.
Four crew members were injured in the crash.
On Oct. 20, two U.S. soldiers were killed in a helicopter accident in Pakistan.
Two days later, a U.S. helicopter trying to extract the wreckage of the crashed Black Hawk helicopter was fired upon and had to abort its mission after returning fire, according to Pentagon officials.
Meanwhile, Pakistani police officials reported that attacks have been made against two Pakistani airports in the last four days.
The officials said they believe the assaults may have been conducted by individuals or groups opposed to the U.S. use of Pakistani airfields to support bombing and Special Forces missions in Afghanistan.
Police said five or six armed men charged into an open-air pavilion at the Quetta airport in southwestern Pakistan late Monday night, killing one police security guard in a shootout.
The attackers escaped, police said.
The Quetta airport, a joint civilian and military facility like most of Pakistan's air bases, is used for a few civilian flights and Pakistani military craft, but has not been a major base of operations for the U.S. military.
On Saturday night, a Pakistan army soldier was shot and killed while patrolling an inner perimeter at the Jacobabad airport in southeastern Sindh province.
The base is one of the main Pakistani facilities used by the U.S. military to support operations in Afghanistan.
It is protected by four rings of security forces -- Pakistani police, paramilitary troops, army soldiers and U.S. Marines, according to Pakistani officials.
Pakistani authorities have publicly labeled the shooting of the army guard an "accident," although sources said some investigators are convinced it was deliberate.
Officials said it was unclear whether the soldier was killed by sniper fire or at close range.
Intelligence authorities are investigating the incident, the second shooting -- but first fatality -- at Jacobabad since U.S. military operations began.
Jacobabad also has been the scene of demonstrations protesting the U.S. military presence.
In other developments, a spokesman at the U.S. Embassy in Islamabad said the U.S. consulate in Lahore, Pakistan's second-largest city, received a letter in late October containing a white powder that has tested positive for anthrax.
The letter was postmarked in Pakistan, but the mark was smudged and illegible, said the spokesman, Mark Wentworth.
He said the envelope bore no return address.
Wentworth also said that U.S. officials have determined that a man who died in Taliban custody over the weekend was not a U.S. citizen, as Taliban officials had claimed.
"There's nothing that indicates that he's an American," Wentworth said.
The International Committee of the Red Cross, which has been asked by the Taliban to transport the body to Pakistan, said it had identified a relative who is in Pakistan and that it had asked that person to claim the body.
ICRC officials would not give the man's name.
"We've been in contact with the family but the right person is not at the right place to pick up the body," said Pascal Duport, deputy head of the Red Cross delegation to Afghanistan.
Taliban officials said that the man, who entered Afghanistan using the name Mazhar Ayub, said under questioning that his real name was John Bolton and that he was an American.
The Taliban officials said the man, who claimed to be a relief worker, was arrested two weeks ago in southern Afghanistan and later died in a hospital of natural causes.
Duport said Red Cross workers in Afghanistan have not inquired about the cause of death. "
Asking those questions could be sensitive for their personal security," he said.
Moore reported from Islamabad. 
Related Links
In the end, the Taliban lost more than half of Afghanistan in much the same way that it came to power: with barely a fight.
Today, with the opposition Northern Alliance in control of Kabul and roughly half the country, the Taliban's estimated 40,000 troops have scattered.
According to military officials and witnesses' accounts, the fighters are melding into craggy Afghan mountains, streaming south toward Kandahar, their movement's birthplace, and returning to their home villages.
Some of the radical Islamic militia's fighters quietly vanished from city streets days before Northern Alliance forces arrived.
Others waited until combat seemed imminent, then gathered their weapons and pulled their vehicles into retreating convoys that seemed to dissipate in the desert dust.
Intelligence officials said today that the majority of troops have become phantoms in the Afghan landscape.
When the Taliban formed in 1994 amid the chaos of factional warfare, it swept across the country with remarkable swiftness -- not by annihilating its enemies but by buying them off, co-opting or outsmarting them.
Persuasion, treachery and momentum brought them to Kabul in two years, far more quickly than prolonged combat would have.
With most of the Taliban forces in retreat, military officials and analysts here said it is unclear how many are regrouping in preparation for guerrilla warfare in the countryside and how many have simply deserted the militia that imposed one of the world's harshest interpretations of Islam on its impoverished people.
Military officials and Afghan specialists said a broad confluence of events spurred the unexpected pace of the Northern Alliance's success.
Daily airstrikes by U.S. warplanes, intensified in recent weeks around key cities, ravaged the Taliban's ability to communicate, move and fight.
Intelligence officials and reports from inside Afghanistan described the Taliban communicating by handwritten commands dispatched with couriers on horseback and getting battlefield intelligence from BBC news broadcasts.
U.S. aerial attacks reportedly also had damaged ammunition reserves, supply lines and -- in the past week -- unnerved front-line troops with large-scale bombing not used in the first month of raids.
"They're in total disarray," a Western diplomat said.
"Their military backbone is apparently broken."
But Pakistani military officials and representatives of aid organizations who have worked with the Taliban are far more cautious.
"They are making a tactical retreat," said an official of a foreign aid group with extensive experience in Afghanistan.
"By moving out of the city and into the mountains, they can decide the terms of engagement for themselves."
Aid organizations monitoring Kandahar reported that large numbers of troops from across Afghanistan appeared to be gathering in the city today, but left quickly with sacks of food and weapons that they appeared to be stockpiling in the mountains.
In addition to the bombing, other factors also sped the Taliban's retreat.
Interviews with commanders on several fronts over the last several days suggest that northern Afghans -- an ethnic mix of Uzbeks, Tajiks and Hazaras who resent the southern, Pashtun-dominated Taliban -- were eager to oust their rulers.
Shortly before the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, the Taliban executed five officials in the northern city of Mazar-e Sharif for plotting a coup.
On Friday, Mazar-e Sharif became the first city to fall to the Northern Alliance.
While opposition commander Ismail Khan was still making his way toward the western city of Herat on Monday, thousands of residents already had taken up arms and were trying to force Taliban troops out of the city, according to Northern Alliance officials.
With Khan's force still five miles from town, "they called and said 'Come on in,' " said Mohammed Hasham Saad, the opposition Northern Alliance's envoy to Uzbekistan.
"What did the Taliban do for Afghanistan?"
Khan said today by satellite telephone in Herat, where he was governor until the Taliban ousted him in 1995 without much more of a battle than he needed to reclaim the city Monday.
"They killed people, they had a terrible regime." 
Khan reportedly told the city's residents that he would reopen girls' schools that the Taliban had shut down and would allow radio and television programming that was banned by the radical Islamic militia.
Rapid shifts of allegiance also have occurred within the Taliban's ranks.
Many of the local commanders who joined the Taliban during its rise in the 1990s are now reportedly turning their backs on the movement.
"Afghans never want to be on the losing side," said a longtime Afghanistan observer here.
"Everyone is staking out positions."
While the Taliban's fighting force, believed to number from 30,000 to more than 40,000 men and boys, now appears to have scattered widely throughout the south, intelligence officials said they still are having difficulty accounting for many of them.
Officials speculate that vast numbers of fighters may have simply returned to their families and home villages in the face of what they considered a lost cause.
According to former fighters who fled to the north, much of the Taliban's rank and file had been forcibly conscripted, often in house-to-house sweeps, and had little will to fight.
Intelligence officials and Afghanistan observers are particularly baffled by the whereabouts of the estimated 4,000 to 8,000 Arab, Chechen and other foreign troops reported to have been fighting with the Taliban.
For several days, intelligence reports and eyewitnesses in Afghanistan had said thousands of Taliban soldiers appeared to be leaving their posts in major cities and moving to remote locations.
A Pakistani journalist who four days ago sneaked into Jalalabad, a major city in western Afghanistan that had been home to many of the Taliban's Arab troops, said he roamed the city for 12 hours but spotted only one small group of Taliban soldiers.
Pakistani intelligence sources said today that they have received credible reports that scores of Taliban troops, including Arabs, have entered Pakistan's southern Baluchistan province since Monday, saying they had been ordered to abandon Afghan cities and prepare for guerrilla operations based in Pakistan.
Alliance commanders said today that hundreds of Taliban fighters who retreated from Mazar-e Sharif and Taloqan appear to be gathering around the northern city of Kunduz.
Officials said that foreign fighters were among the troops there.
"Many local [Taliban] commanders have defected," Northern Alliance official Saad said, "but the real Taliban and the Arabs are resisting until the last bullet.
They are fighting until they are killed or captured."
Special correspondent Kamran Khan contributed to this report.
Robby McGehee spun, hit the wall twice and nearly flipped his car.
On any other track, he could have been seriously injured.
At the Indianapolis Motor Speedway this year, McGehee most likely will get another chance.
Protected by the new soft wall in turn three, McGehee limped away with small fractures in his upper spine and lower left leg.
He won't be allowed to return to practice for the Indy 500 for at least a few days, the Indy Racing League said Monday.
"The fact that I hit the wall that hard
and I don't have a head injury is a testament that the safer wall worked," said McGehee, on cr ering the turn.
The wall responded mostly as track officials expected.
The crash collapsed the bottom panel of the four steel tubes and gouged a second panel.
Both were repaired on the track, although there was a 36-minute delay before practice resumed.
The walls, which are being used on the outside walls of all four turns on the 2 -mile oval, also appeared to work.
Indy Racing League vice president Brian Barnhart said McGehee's first hit came with a force of 40 Gs, the second with a force of 72.7 Gs far less than had been recorded in similar accidents.
Debris from the car was scattered across the track, but McGehee, with help, walked away.
"It was a hell of an impact," Gil de Ferran, a Roger Penske driver, said after seeing the crash. "
Ultimately, he walked out of the car, injured, but he did walk out of the car.
So he got away without much injury."
That much was by design when the IRL began its project to find a safer wall four years ago.
What researchers at the University of Nebraska came up with was a contraption that uses four steel tubes that are welded.
The wall is then attached with steel cables and bolts into the concrete walls that line the track and the back of the steel.
Between the two walls are 16 inches of hard foam.
The foam allows the wall to bend when it is hit, which reduces the impact on a driver like a shock absorber.
The device got its first real test with McGehee.
"It was a very solid rear impact, and we really like what we see," Barnhart said of the wall, which is being tested on a race track for the first time.
"It did not snag, it did not have a rebound angle, and the foam performed really well."
Crash tests were done with cars being towed on a pulley going between 100 and 153 mph and at angles of 20 to 25 degrees.
But McGehee hit the wall at 218 or 219 mph and at angle of almost 90 degrees.
Yet the cables appeared to have been hardly strained, only a couple pieces of the foam broke off and everything else responded the way track officials anticipated.
"Everything held up pretty well other than a puncture in a couple of tubes," said Kevin Forbes, the speedway's director of engineering and construction.
Those were repaired while the track was cleaned up, which Forbes said took longer than it would have during the race because the crews wanted to inspect the damage and come up with race strategies based on information gathered from the wreck.
The accident and performance of the new wall overshadowed the rest of practice.
Last year's pole-winner Scott Sharp, of Kelley Racing, had the day's fastest speed of 227.571 mph.
Sharp won the IRL's last race at Nazareth, Pa.
Seven other drivers, including defending champ Helio Castroneves, also were faster than Sharp's 226.037 pole-qualifying time of last year.
TWO WEEKS AFTER the beginning of the U.S. military campaign in Afghanistan, the United Nations and Bush administration officials charged with the daunting task of shaping a new political order in that devastated country are still sorting through the invariably difficult options.
The U.N. special envoy, Lakhdar Brahimi, began in-depth conversations with U.S. officials only last week; later this week he will begin talking with the Afghan exile groups spread across the world, from Rome and Cypress to Iran, Pakistan and beyond.
Secretary of State Colin Powell and his staff are further ahead, but they, too, have yet to answer such questions as when and how a new government could be established for Afghanistan, and whether an international force will be needed to restore order.
A lot depends on what happens in the few weeks remaining before the onset of winter, and on whether U.S. and opposition Afghan forces can defeat -- as opposed to merely disperse -- the leadership and troops of the Taliban regime.
That's why one official uses the phrase "navigation by sight" to describe this latest international exercise in nation-building.
These complicated prospects are worrying some governments in Europe and Central Asia, and with reason.
As opposition to the Afghan campaign rises, Pakistan is eager for the United States to end the bombing as quickly as possible.
Humanitarian groups are growing more and more worried about their ability to deliver food to up to 6 million needy people inside Afghanistan this winter.
The longer the war lasts, the harder it will be for the United States to maintain its coalition against al Qaeda and be effective in the war for public opinion in Muslim countries.
But the United States probably cannot drive the Taliban from Kabul with air power and special forces alone, and the only alternative inside the country, the Northern Alliance, so far is struggling in an offensive against the northern city of Mazar-e-Sharif.
Even if it were to succeed in taking Kabul and other southern cities, the alliance might only provoke another round of fighting with the ethnic groups it excludes.
At best, Mr. Brahimi and other brokers may be able to cobble together an interim political coalition in the coming weeks that, with heavy support from the United Nations and a hastily assembled Afghan or international security force, might take power in Kabul and other key areas before winter.
If Taliban resistance crumbles or there are defections of forces in the south, the Northern Alliance might succeed in taking over military control of most of the country, with political arrangements coming afterward.
But it is entirely possible that creating an administration and clearing the Taliban out of the way for it will take considerably longer.
If that is the case, the United States will have to be prepared to stay the course, continuing military operations through the winter and resisting appeals for a "pause" that would allow the Taliban and al Qaeda to regroup.
Suspending or slowing the military campaign will only postpone the day when the Taliban regime can be unseated, while the steady destruction of its forces should encourage agreement on a replacement.
Though the course is not yet clear, the easiest and quickest way to resolve the Afghan political problem surely lies in continuing the fight against the Taliban and al Qaeda, relentlessly.
2001
The Washington Post Company
As Russian President Vladimir Putin arrived at the White House yesterday, he and President Bush were on the cusp of resolving a monumental question: whether Russia would allow the United States to proceed with a missile defense system without abrogating the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty.
But when the two leaders faced the cameras in a joint news conference from the East Room, lofty ideas about the post-Cold War world order, which dominated Russian-American relations for much of the year, were suddenly less pressing than the day's developments in Kabul.
Unable to agree so far on a change in the ABM Treaty to allow U.S. missile defense tests, and distracted by the war, the presidents focused on other matters.
Bush spoke of his ranch in Texas.
Putin spoke of the white nights in St. Petersburg.
The two men commented on the Northern Alliance, the Middle East, NATO, drug trafficking, even the Jackson-Vanik law linking human rights and trade.
They brushed quickly past the ABM accord.
Reporters from both countries were willing accomplices: Four of the six questions were about Afghanistan.
The highlight of the joint appearance in the East Room came when a Russian questioner asked Bush whether he had gone too far in asking media outlets not to run Osama bin Laden's full statements.
It was, undoubtedly, the first time a Russian journalist expressed concern to an American president about media freedoms in the United States.
"I've been trying to tame our press corps ever since I got into politics, and I've failed miserably," Bush said, laughing at his own joke.
"They get to express their opinions -- sometimes in the form of news -- any way they want to."
The American side laughed heartily.
The Russians did not even grin.
Putin, an old KGB hand, had no trouble with such restrictions. "
Today, giving a rostrum to international terrorists would be equal to giving newspapers of the Second World War times an opportunity to print Doctor Goebbels's articles.
"
The pattern repeated itself throughout the session: the Russian president outdoing the American president in defending U.S. actions in the war.
Asked about allegations of Northern Alliance excesses as the group took the city of Kabul, Bush replied mildly about "the need for us to work with our Northern Alliance friends to treat people with respect."
Putin, responding to the same question, fiercely demanded proof of wrongdoing by the U.S.-backed Northern Alliance and chided the press corps to "pay attention" to the Taliban instead.
"We tend to forget now the destruction of the cultural heritage of humankind," he said.
"We tend to forget now the atrocities by Taliban."
It became apparent early in the morning that missiles and the ABM Treaty were not going to be the most pressing matters of the day.
A military honor guard lined the White House driveway as Putin's limousine -- transported from Russia -- entered the grounds.
But at the White House morning briefing, there was barely a mention of Russia or its leader.
The topics were petroleum reserves, aviation security and Afghanistan.
Putin, who wants to maintain the ABM Treaty that Bush wants to replace, seemed more than pleased to discuss terrorism instead.
Prodded by a Russian reporter about the dangers of American influence in Central Asia, Putin retorted: "I am more concerned with the presence of the terrorist training camps in the northern Afghanistan."
Though unable to reach agreement on missile defense for now, both leaders professed themselves unbothered.
"We're transforming our relationship," Bush said, "from one of hostility and suspicion to one based on cooperation and trust."
And art.
Putin's visit to the White House lasted four hours, including lunch in the Blue Room -- and an extensive cultural tour.
"I saw almost every picture hanging on the wall of this great building," Putin said.
The White House, for the record, has 450 pieces of art.
Crowds of Palestinian supporters of Osama bin Laden attacked their own security forces in the Gaza Strip today in the most violent challenge to Yasser Arafat's administration since shortly after it was established in 1994.
At least two people were reported killed and scores injured after police opened fire.
As rioting spread this evening, the Palestinian Authority declared a state of emergency in the Gaza Strip, an impoverished, 147-square-mile band of territory fenced off by Israel.
Hundreds of police officers carrying clubs patrolled the streets, all demonstrations were outlawed and Gaza's two main universities were ordered closed.
The demonstrations were triggered by the U.S.-led attack on Afghanistan and Palestinian sympathy for bin Laden, the suspected terrorist mastermind who praised the Palestinian cause in a taped statement broadcast around the world after the attacks began Sunday night.
Simmering anger with Arafat's leadership also appeared to be fueling the protests.
Arafat had ordered his police forces to quash any demonstrations sympathetic to bin Laden in order to maintain U.S. support and distance himself from extremism.
His lieutenants instructed Palestinian journalists not to cover any such events or transmit images of them to the media.
Some analysts said the rioting could alter the character of the Palestinians' current uprising against Israel, now in its second year.
Others said the uprising would continue undiminished, but that Arafat's leadership, already facing severe challenges from Islamic opposition groups and others, would be shakier than ever.
As rioting continued, Arafat's security forces were reported to have made more than 120 arrests.
That news cheered Israeli officials, who for months have demanded that Arafat detain Islamic militants.
They were also heartened by reports this evening that Arafat had ordered the arrest of anyone who attacks Israelis, an order that would likely include members of Hamas and Islamic Jihad, militant groups that have carried out a string of bombings against Israelis.
"Better late than never," said Raanan Gissin, spokesman for Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon.
The militants "did what they wanted like a state within a state.
Arafat tried to say it was Israel's problem, but now it's his problem and that's why he's taking action.
It's a matter of survival for him."
In the heart of Gaza City, the largest Palestinian town, automatic weapons fire rang out for more than four hours at midday as Palestinian police battled protesters, some of whom appeared to be firing back with guns of their own.
Plumes of black smoke billowed skyward from burning cars and gutted stores, and ambulances raced from the scene of the fighting bearing the wounded, their sirens screaming.
Several Palestinian police stations in neighborhoods and refugee camps near the city were reported to have been set on fire or besieged by rioters.
The offices of Palestinian Airlines, a symbol of Arafat's rule here, were gutted and burned.
Journalists at the scene and other witnesses ranked the violence with some of the worst clashes between Palestinians and Israeli forces during the past year of fighting.
In his statement Sunday, bin Laden vowed there would be "no security for America until there is security for Palestine."
That inspired many Palestinians, whose feelings of impotence on the international stage make them especially suggestible to anyone claiming to champion their cause.
"It is the duty of every Palestinian to support bin Laden because he's backing our cause," said a 22-year-old art student at al-Najah University in the West Bank city of Nablus who gave his name only as Qusai.
"Whoever supports us is our friend."
But Palestinian Authority officials today condemned the attacks on the United States.
"We don't want crimes committed in the name of Palestine," said Information Minister Yasser Abed Rabbo, according to the Associated Press.
Today's rioting was the worst among Palestinians since November 1994, when Islamic militants challenged the Palestinian Authority just months after it was established under the Oslo peace agreement with Israel.
In that unrest, Arafat's forces killed at least 11 people, and Islamic militants have avoided direct challenges to his leadership ever since.
During today's violence, Arafat was in Cairo and then flew to Bahrain.
Palestinian officials were embarrassed by scenes of celebration that broke out in some neighborhoods immediately after the Sept. 11 attacks in the United States.
After Sunday's strikes on Afghanistan, officials of the Palestinian Authority predicted confidently there would be no demonstrations against the United States or in sympathy with bin Laden.
Arafat allied himself with Iraq during the 1991 Persian Gulf War and is determined not to isolate his movement that way again.
But at 10 a.m., about 1,000 students spilled out from the gates of the Islamic University of Gaza and began marching west on 30th Street, a major Gaza City thoroughfare, toward the offices of the Palestinian Legislative Council.
Some of the students displayed posters of bin Laden and chanted anti-American slogans.
Islamic University, with about 14,000 students, is a stronghold of Hamas, the Islamic Resistance Movement, a radical group that has carried out a string of suicide bombings against Israelis.
The Islamic students were joined by students from neighboring Al-Azhar University, which is affiliated with Arafat's mainstream Fatah movement.
Hundreds of Palestinian riot police blocked the march, and the students began pelting them with stones and bottles.
The police drove them back several hundred yards into the walled Islamic University campus.
At around 11 a.m., as the students continued to hurl rocks and bottles at the police from inside the gated campus, the police opened fire with military rifles.
Ali said the rioting could continue "for a few days until people can vent their anger at the Palestinian Authority.
And if they shoot people again, things will explode."
In a statement, Ghazi Jabali, the Palestinian police commander and a close confidant of Arafat, blamed the casualties on masked individuals inside the university compound who opened fire first.
The students denied it.
Palestinian journalists said most of the gunfire, though perhaps not all, came from the police.
The dead included a 13-year-old boy and a 21-year-old student, Anwar Akel, whose older brother Imad, a top Hamas militant, was killed by the Israelis in 1992.
A Palestinian police officer was reported to be clinically dead.
Related Links
Russian President Vladimir Putin today branded the Winter Games "a flop" as his sports delegation escalated its complaints, filing a protest alleging that the judges were biased in Thursday night's figure skating finals and demanding a duplicate gold medal for Irina Slutskaya, who finished second.
But in the end, the protest was denied and the Russians did not quit the Games as threatened.
That was not the only disappointment of the day for the Russians.
Instead, 22 years to the day after perhaps the greatest Olympic hockey upset in history -- the United States' 1980 "Miracle on Ice" victory over the Soviet Union in Lake Placid, N.Y. -- the Americans withstood a furious third-period rally by the Russians to win, 3-2.
The Russians were outshot 38-11 and trailed 3-0 after two periods, but scored just 11 seconds into the third period and added their second goal a little more than three minutes later.
The game then turned into a desperate effort by the Russians to score that was reminiscent of the game in Lake Placid 22 years ago.
But the United States remained unbeaten in 70 years in Olympic play on home ice, and the Russians move into the bronze medal game Saturday against Belarus.
Jacques Rogge, the new Belgian president of the International Olympic Committee, today took "multiple meetings" with Russian officials, who agreed to remain in the Winter Games and who will submit a list of their concerns about judging and other matters.
Francois Carrard, director general of the IOC, said that this "list of grievances" will be studied and that Rogge will press the various sporting federations, which oversee the actual judging of events, to respond later this year.
"The national team will stay," said Vitaly Smirnov, Russia's member of the IOC's executive board, who on Thursday warned that his country's entire team would pull out if its grievances were not addressed.
The threats marked a return to a kind of Cold War rhetoric, with lots of shouting about wounded national pride.
The Russian delegation this morning filed a formal protest with the International Skating Union contesting the gold medal awarded to American Sarah Hughes in Thursday night's figure skating final over Slutskaya.
The Russian protest charged that the judges were biased against Slutskaya and requested that the Russian skater receive her own gold medal, as Canadian pairs skaters Jamie Sale and David Pelletier did after the ISU found evidence of judicial misconduct by a French judge whose vote gave the gold to Russians Anton Sikharulidze and Elena Berezhnaya.
"We don't want to take the gold medal away from the American skater, but our skater deserved a gold medal," said Russian team spokesman Rudolf Nezvegsky.
But late in the day, the ISU rejected the Russian appeal.
The Russians could pursue the matter before the Court of Arbitration for Sport.
"We were impressed by the American figure skaters," Leonid Tyagachev, the president of the Russian Olympic Committee, told Reuters television today before the protest was rejected. "
But two of them made small mistakes and, of course, Slutskaya was the best, better than the young American skater."
In the women's long program Thursday night, the Russian judge awarded Hughes a fourth-place finish, while five judges gave Hughes a first-place finish.
The 16-year-old is the first woman in Olympic history to perform two triple-triple combination jumps in the same program.
The Russian delegation's frustration with its treatment at the Winter Games first boiled over at a raucous news conference Thursday night, when Russian officials accused referees in ice hockey and judges in figure skating of unfairly penalizing their athletes and favoring those of other nations.
The Russians were also upset because one of their women cross-country skiers, nine-time Olympic medalist Larissa Lazutina, was disqualified from the 20-kilometer relay Thursday morning after a pre-race blood test showed high amounts of hemoglobin.
At a news conference today in Moscow, Putin, calling the Salt Lake games "a flop," reprimanded Russian officials for swallowing what he said were too many biased decisions against the country's athletes.
But both Putin and the Russian legislature stopped short of calling for the team pack up in protest and forgo competition in the remaining events.
"Let's see how the Olympic Games end," Putin told reporters at the Kremlin.
Putin singled out Rogge for blame.
"The first attempt was a flop for the new IOC leadership," he said.
From the Russian parliament to day-care centers, Putin's views were widely echoed today across the Russian nation.
Despite a growing consensus that the cards are stacked against their teams, most Russians say it would be wrong to withdraw.
A call-in poll conducted today by RTR state television found that 65 percent of respondents wanted the Russians to stay in Salt Lake City.
Television commentators suggested Russia has not suffered so many bad calls in the Olympics since the Cold War.
Mikhail Margelov, chairman of the international affairs committee of the Federation Council, the upper house of parliament, said the Games smacked of an earlier era when sports competition was viewed as "a confrontation of two worlds.
"
"These people praise us when it's in their interests," Margelov said.
"They pinch us in the nose when we are in the way."
In an angry session, the State Duma, the lower house of parliament, voted 417-0 on a nonbinding resolution to boycott the Closing Ceremonies of the Games unless the IOC apologized.
Kremlin spokesman Sergei Yastrzhembsky said Putin received a letter today from Rogge that indicated the committee's disregard for Russia's concerns.
The letter, in which Rogge defended the decisions against Russian athletes, was addressed to A. Putin, according to Yastrzhembsky. "
Mr. Rogge should know that our president's name is not Antoine," he said.
Alexei Volin, Putin's deputy chief of staff, said the number of disqualified Russian athletes was too high to be just an accident, and pointed to a deliberate campaign to discredit the entire Russian team.
Russian Aluminum, a firm sponsoring the Russian team, announced it would hire one of the world's leading law firms to defend Russian competitors because "the Olympic organizers are engaged in real warfare."
The issue of bias has captured the Russian public's attention like few other topics in recent months.
An estimated 92 percent of Moscow residents are watching the Games on a state-controlled channel.
One looming concern to the Russian government was the referees for tonight's U.S.-Russia hockey game, all of whom were provided by the National Hockey League.
"I find it hard to imagine how you can guarantee quality and objectivity in the officiating, given that the referees live and work in North America," Putin said.
That amounts to "a clear advantage" for the Americans, even if the referees try to be fair, he said.
But Putin did not mention that 21 of Russia's 22 men's hockey players and all of the United States' play in the NHL.
Russia has also complained of unfair refereeing during its team's quarterfinal hockey match against the Czech Republic, and protested what it called biased judging in the women's freestyle aerials event.
Today's hockey match against the United States was expected to draw a huge television audience in Russia, even though the live broadcast did not begin until 2:15 a.m.
On Moscow's subway this morning, riders made plans to pick up beer after work and stay up all night.
Owners of bars with big-screen television sets prepared for crowds.
LaFraniere reported from Moscow.
A federal judge temporarily blocked Drug Enforcement Administration agents yesterday from punishing doctors in Oregon who prescribe drugs that help terminally ill patients die.
On Tuesday, Attorney General John D. Ashcroft challenged Oregon's landmark assisted suicide law by instructing DEA agents to go after the drug licenses of physicians who prescribe powerful sedatives and narcotics to help sick patients commit suicide.
On Wednesday, Oregon's attorney general filed a lawsuit in federal court in Portland, arguing that Ashcroft was overstepping his authority and that his attempt to shut down physician-assisted suicide in Oregon was unconstitutional because it interferes with a state's right to oversee its own medical and health care systems.
Yesterday, U.S. District Judge Robert Jones granted the temporary restraining order requested by Oregon Attorney General Hardy Myers and blocked Ashcroft and the DEA from pursuing doctors in the state.
The order will remain in effect until Nov. 20, when the judge may rule on whether to grant a preliminary injunction until the case can be tried in court.
"We're very pleased with this ruling, and we will continue to defend the rights of patients and physicians in Oregon," said Kevin Neely, a spokesman for Myers.
Mindy Tucker, a spokeswoman for the Justice Department, said agency officials could not comment on the pending litigation.
Oregon has the nation's only law that allows physician-assisted suicide.
Since voters passed the Death With Dignity Act in 1997, about 70 terminally ill people have used drugs to kill themselves.
Before getting the drugs, the patients must demonstrate that they are terminally ill with less than six months to live and mentally capable of making medical decisions.
A physician may then prescribe the drugs but does not administer them.
Opponents of physician-assisted suicide argue that doctors take an oath to do no harm to patients and that prescribing drugs to help people die crosses ethical and religious lines.
Ashcroft was not seeking to arrest physicians but to revoke the licenses that allow them to prescribe powerful medications such as narcotics, which are federally controlled.
Ashcroft's decision to challenge Oregon's assisted suicide practices reverses the policy of his predecessor, Janet Reno, who prohibited federal agents from moving against doctors who use Oregon's law.
Supporters of the suicide law applauded the federal judge's decision yesterday to grant a temporary stay.
"We're just at the beginning of this, but it's very, very good news," said Eli Stutsman, a director of the Oregon Death With Dignity legal center.
"It's sometimes ugly when politics and law meet.
This is one of those times."
Several states involved in the Microsoft Corp. antitrust case were prepared last night to reject a settlement between the Department of Justice and the company unless the software giant agreed to major changes, sources said.
But one key state, New York, struck a separate tentative deal with Microsoft, said sources close to the states' deliberations.
Calling the Justice Department settlement a "license for Microsoft to use its dominance and power to crush its competition," Massachusetts Attorney General Tom Reilly said yesterday that he would not sign it without major changes.
California also will tell a federal judge this morning that without modifications it cannot support the settlement and will pursue the case without the Justice Department, sources said.
U.S. District Court Judge Colleen Kollar-Kotelly gave the states until a court hearing today at 9 a.m. to decide whether to join the settlement.
The judge eventually will decide whether the agreement is in the public interest, but any number of states can pursue the court case on their own to the next phase -- which would determine how Microsoft should be penalized for illegally abusing its monopoly power.
The decisions by the states and the company will mark yet another remarkable turn in the nearly four-year-old case, the largest monopoly prosecution by the government in a generation.
The agreement reached last week was sharply criticized by Microsoft's industry rivals, who believe that recent court decisions affirmed their claims that Microsoft's business practices were predatory and stifled competition.
Assistant U.S. Attorney General Charles James and Microsoft said Friday that their deal would not be altered.
But yesterday, the company and New York Attorney General Eliot Spitzer were negotiating separately and were expected to finalize an agreement in time for the court appearance today.
Spitzer, who only two months ago publicly vowed to press the case if the Justice Department was not sufficiently aggressive, was seeking an amendment to the agreement that was not as broad as what the coalition is asking for, the sources said.
Many of Spitzer's fellow attorneys general were furious at his dealing on the side, sources said.
Spokesmen for the Justice Department and Microsoft declined to comment on the day's developments.
Sources said that how many states decide to support or reject the agreement will depend on how flexible Microsoft is in modifying the deal, and on the decision of Iowa Attorney General Tom Miller, who has led the coalition of 17 states and the District of Columbia.
The states planned a final conference call today at 7 a.m. before heading to court.
Assuming some states pursue litigation, Kollar-Kotelly must decide how the case should proceed on two tracks.
She must determine a schedule for ultimate hearings on how Microsoft's anti-competitive conduct should be rectified.
Before the deal between the Justice Department and Microsoft, she had set hearings to begin in March, with time in between for taking depositions and gathering evidence.
She also must review the current settlement agreement and determine whether it is in the public interest, under a law known as the Tunney Act.
The law provides for a 60-day public comment period, during which the government must file its rationale for the settlement, and opponents can file arguments on why it fails to meet the public interest.
"The judge has wide discretion in defining the public interest," said Robert Litan, an antitrust expert at the Brookings Institution.
Given that Kollar-Kotelly strongly urged the parties to settle, and that the Justice Department has latitude in how it wants to prosecute antitrust actions, many lawyers associated with the case believe she is likely to approve it.
But Litan and other legal analysts said that this Tunney Act proceeding will be unusual because most settlements are reached before trials are held, so no findings of guilt have been issued by courts.
In this case, a trial judge ruled that numerous Microsoft business practices violated antitrust laws, and many of those findings were upheld by a federal appeals court in June.
Kollar-Kotelly will have to decide how closely the settlement needs to reflect the appeals court decision.
The Justice Department believes that its settlement provides strong prohibitions on anti-competitive conduct by Microsoft and that it meets the mandate of the appeals court.
Legal and industry critics of the agreement say it falls far short and is riddled with loopholes and exceptions that favor Microsoft.
2001
The Washington Post Company
U.S. warplanes struck targets across Afghanistan yesterday in the heaviest day of bombing since the air campaign began, as huge explosions rocked the Afghan capital of Kabul and an Air Force AC-130 gunship fired on the Taliban stronghold of Kandahar, Pentagon officials said.
Fifty carrier-based fighter jets and 10 long-range bombers were joined for the first time by the AC-130, one of the most devastating weapons in the U.S. air arsenal.
They struck targets throughout the day and into the night, aided in part by what Pentagon officials said was fresh information on Taliban and terrorist positions provided by opposition forces.
Defense officials declined to disclose the AC-130's mission around Kandahar, a city in southern Afghanistan that is one of the centers of power for the Taliban, the Islamic militia that rules most of the country.
But the slow-moving aircraft, armed with a 150-mm howitzer and a Gatling gun capable of firing 1,800 rounds per minute, can lay down a withering carpet of fire against ground positions.
Although the pace of daily U.S. airstrikes against Afghanistan has not matched previous campaigns against Yugoslavia and Iraq, the attacks yesterday represented a marked escalation in the nine-day-old anti-terrorism war and signaled it could be entering a new phase.
The Pentagon also moved forcefully on another front -- the emerging war of information with the Taliban over the extent of civilian casualties and damage from the U.S. airstrikes.
As protests mounted in Pakistan and elsewhere in the Islamic world over the conduct of the U.S. campaign, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said U.S. forces had begun dropping leaflets over Afghanistan -- in the local languages of Pashto and Dari -- along with humanitarian food packets.
One leaflet shows a Western soldier in camouflage and helmet shaking hands with a man in traditional Afghan dress in front of a mountain scene. "
The partnership of nations is here to assist the people of Afghanistan," the leaflet said.
Another depicted a radio transmitting tower and sketches of radios and included times and radio frequencies to tune to for what it calls "Information Radio" -- apparently a reference to broadcasts from a circling U.S. C-130 cargo plane that began shortly after U.S. and British forces launched the air campaign on Oct. 7.
Rumsfeld said the Taliban's charges that errant U.S. bombs have killed 300 civilians, including 200 in the eastern village of Karam, were "ridiculous."
But he acknowledged that the United States has failed to justify the reasons for its anti-terrorism campaign with clarity with Muslims in the Middle East, South Asia and elsewhere.
"We have to do a better job," he said.
"Our cause is just, what we're doing is right, and we have absolutely nothing to hide."
National security adviser Condoleezza Rice, seeking to buttress that point, went on a Middle Eastern news network and assured its audience, "We want it to be very clear that the war on terrorism is not a war against Islam."
Airstrikes were reported yesterday in regions across Afghanistan, which the Bush administration charges is harboring Saudi-born Islamic militant Osama bin Laden and his al Qaeda network.
The United States blames bin Laden for the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on New York and Washington.
Carrier-based fighter jets and long-range bombers began their assault on Kabul before dawn.
They dropped bombs throughout the day and into the night, sending residents fleeing an area north of the city near an abandoned military base, witnesses said.
Further attacks were reported in Jalalabad to the east, Kandahar to the south and Mazar-e Sharif to the north, where Gen. Abdurrashid Dostum, a Northern Alliance leader, drove within a few miles of the city's airport.
One senior official familiar with yesterday's targets said that the AC-130 was scheduled to be part of the mission.
As of late last night, the official said he had not received reports about how it performed.
"We just felt that it was the appropriate weapons system for the mission," the official said.
"It's basically a flying artillery piece.
It tends to be very, very precise fire, pretty heavy fire, and very accurate fire."
Rumsfeld and Air Force Gen. Richard B. Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, denied the Taliban's claim that 200 civilians had been killed in the village of Karam.
Rumsfeld said the attack near Karam had destroyed an underground cave complex associated with the Taliban and al Qaeda.
Calling leaders of the Taliban and al Qaeda "accomplished liars," Rumsfeld said the strike on the cave complex was "unambiguous.
It was into the tunnels, and it worked."
Myers said military officials were surprised the strike had detonated stored ammunition and touched off a raging underground fire in the complex that lasted for 3-1/2 to 4 hours.
He said that reconnaissance photographs taken before the attack showed that Karam was "not heavily occupied," and that pictures taken afterward revealed no bomb craters in the village.
While the Pentagon asserts that most fixed targets associated with the Taliban and al Qaeda have been destroyed, Rumsfeld and other senior defense officials said the pace of airstrikes would not diminish.
They said U.S. pilots would begin turning their sights on troop concentrations and other "emerging targets."
Rumsfeld said recent targets were "significantly enhanced" by information from Afghan opposition forces and had included Taliban troop concentrations for the last three or four days.
Military commanders from the Northern Alliance, a coalition of opposition forces that occupies parts of northern Afghanistan, have complained in recent days that the United States has not bombed Taliban troops dug in north of Kabul in defense of the capital.
Rumsfeld attributed the lack of strikes to a dearth of reliable target information and implied that bombing raids against those forces were imminent.
"I suspect that in the period ahead," Rumsfeld said, "that's not going to be a very safe place to be."
One U.S. official, who asked not to be quoted by name, said officials planning the air campaign are in direct contact with the Northern Alliance, among other opposition groups.
"Some of the information from the Northern Alliance has not been particularly useful, which may explain why there may have been a lack of activity in certain areas," the official said.
Another senior defense official said targeting has shifted from a relatively small number of "strategic" targets such as surface-to-air missile sites to an "unlimited" number of Taliban troop concentrations.
"I don't know what the Taliban has in terms of troops -- 30,000 or 40,000," the official said.
"But that's a lot of places to drop ordnance."
The Navy has four aircraft carriers in the area, with the USS Roosevelt heading toward the northern Indian Ocean after sailing through the Suez Canal on Saturday.
Since the bombing began, the USS Enterprise and the USS Carl Vinson have been responsible for launching all the carrier-strike aircraft over Afghanistan.
Navy officials have yet to decide whether the Roosevelt will replace the Enterprise, which is nearing the end of its standard deployment, or whether all three carriers are needed.
A fourth carrier, the USS Kitty Hawk, is near Afghanistan, in the Arabian Sea, for use as a possible launching platform for special operations helicopters.
The Kitty Hawk was deployed to the region without its fighter jets.
During his Pentagon briefing, Rumsfeld said that he would try to gather additional details about an aborted strike against Mohamad Omar, the Taliban's leader, first reported this week by the New Yorker magazine.
According to the New Yorker,, a Predator unmanned aerial vehicle armed with Hellfire missiles and operated by the CIA identified a convoy of vehicles on the first night of bombing as belonging to Omar.
After tracking the convoy to a building on the outskirts of Kabul, the magazine said, an assault by fighter bombers was ordered but ultimately called off by a military lawyer attached to the U.S. Central Command who had concerns about the rules of engagement.
Related Links
Mike Tyson is applying to have his Michigan boxing license reinstated in a possible attempt to fight heavyweight champion Lennox Lewis in Detroit.
Jerome P. Barney, chairman and chief financial officer of Detroit-based All World International Network LLC, said Thursday that Tyson's application was expected to be delivered Friday to the state Athletic Board of Control.
Barney said he was confident he could win state approval and persuade Tyson and Lewis to hold a June fight at Joe Louis Arena.
Barney said Detroit's long history of boxing and the presence of downtown casinos make it an ideal place to hold what he called a "the fight of the new millennium."
"This is going to be world news," he said.
"Detroit is going to be a world stage."
Shelly Finkel, Tyson's adviser, said the chances that Tyson would choose to fight in Michigan are "very high."
He said he was working on a deal that would bring the fight to the state.
Patrick English, general counsel for Main Events, Lewis' New Jersey-based promoter, said none of the cities reported to be in contention have been ruled out.
But he said Washington appears to be leading the pack.
Another plus for the city is its proximity to Canada, which Barney said he thinks would appeal to Lewis who grew up in Ontario and make the fight a "battle of the border."
Barney, who is a member of the Board of Control, said Tyson's checkered past should not stop him from having his license reinstated.
"This is a fight," he said.
"This is the sweet science of pugilism.
They're going to get into the ring and try to knock each other out.
He's served his time and the other allegations are unfounded.
It's all part of the hype."
Michigan can deny a boxer's license only if he is on suspension in any other state, in jail or fails a pre-fight physical.
However, a bill being considered by a state House committee would require boxing license applicants to demonstrate "good moral character."
David Sebastian, chairman of the Athletic Board of Control, also was at Thursday's new conference.
He would not comment on Tyson or the potential fight, but said anyone objecting to Michigan's existing license requirements should urge their state lawmakers to support the House bill.
Former boxing great Thomas Hearns also is trying to stage a Tyson-Lewis fight in Michigan.
He filed paperwork with the state on Feb. 6 requesting permission for an April 6 bout at the Pontiac Silverdome.
Tyson and Lewis were scheduled to fight for the heavyweight title that night in Las Vegas, but Nevada officials voted 4-1 to deny Tyson a license to fight in that state.
"I'm still trying to make something happen," said Hearns, whose Hearns Entertainment Inc. filed notice and a $50 fee with CIS.
The application doesn't name boxers who would fight at the event.
Out-of-state boxers typically are licensed the night of an event.
Washington, California, Texas, Georgia, Denver, England, Denmark and the Netherlands also have been among the sites floated as possible venues for a Tyson-Lewis fight.
In January 2001, state regulators suspended Tyson's Michigan boxing license for 90 days and fined him $5,000 for refusing to submit to a urine test before an October 2000 fight against Andrew Golota at The Palace of Auburn Hills.
U.S. officials said yesterday that a letter mailed in Pakistan to a U.S. consulate in the city of Lahore has tested positive for anthrax bacteria, providing possible evidence that the anthrax outbreak in the United States is of international rather than domestic origin.
State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said preliminary testing in Pakistan indicated that the letter contained anthrax spores.
Samples from the tainted letter arrived Sunday in the United States for further testing by the U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases at Fort Detrick, Md., he said.
Results of the Fort Detrick tests have not been announced.
The letter came to the consulate on Oct. 31 "in the public local mail," Boucher said.
"They had an off-site mailroom facility, and it was checked, bagged, isolated there, and then sent on to us for further testing."
The Lahore letter is the first piece of contaminated mail received at a U.S. consulate that has not come via diplomatic pouch from the United States.
If the positive test is confirmed and the Pakistani bacteria are similar to spores mailed in the United States, the letter could provide evidence that the U.S. anthrax outbreak has international origins.
Investigators have said repeatedly that they do not know whether the bacteria have been spread by domestic extremists or by international terrorists linked to the Sept. 11 attacks against the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
Boucher cautioned Monday that many "preliminary positives" for anthrax later have turned out to be negative.
And even if additional testing confirms that the Pakistani letter contained B. anthracis , the bacteria that cause anthrax, that does not mean that the spores are necessarily the same as those mailed in the United States.
In the last known incident of attempted anthrax terrorism in Asia -- an attack perpetrated in Japan by the Aum Shinrikyo cult in the early 1990s -- no one grew ill.
Genetic analysis showed that the Aum Shinrikyo spores belonged to the Sterne strain, a weakened type of bacteria used as a veterinary vaccine.
It stimulates immunity but does not cause disease.
Boucher said yesterday that a diplomatic mail pouch received at the American consulate in Yekaterinburg had tested positive for a "negligible" amount of anthrax bacteria.
Similar contamination of U.S. diplomatic mail has been detected in Lima, Peru, and Vilnius, Lithuania, as well as at a State Department sorting facility in Sterling, Va.
There have been 17 confirmed cases of anthrax in the United States, including four deaths, since the beginning of October, all but one of them attributed to the handling of tainted mail.
On Capitol Hill yesterday, Senate Majority Leader Thomas A. Daschle (D-S.D.) said plans to fumigate the entire Hart Senate Office Building had been abandoned in favor of a four-step process to eliminate anthrax spores through foam cleaning, testing and some fumigation.
Daschle said the Environmental Protection Agency would use chlorine dioxide gas to sterilize his Hart office and that of his neighbor, Sen. Russell Feingold (D-Wis.).
The Hart Building was closed Oct. 19 after a mail handler in Daschle's office opened a letter containing anthrax spores in a powder that quickly spread through the air.
Daschle said the EPA also planned to use chlorine dioxide to fumigate the heating, air-conditioning and ventilation system.
"Hot spots" will be scrubbed with special cleansing foam, a process that began Monday with the washing down of a contaminated freight elevator and stairwell, he said.
Finally, Daschle told reporters, each of the 50 Senate offices in the Hart Building will be "spot-tested" to ensure there is no further contamination.
He said senators would not be able to move back in until Nov. 21 at the earliest. "
Safety must come before convenience," Daschle said later on the Senate floor.
The EPA last week recommended using chlorine dioxide, a powerful bleaching agent that has been shown to be effective in killing bacteria in lab tests.
But Daschle said the EPA has decided that "there are too many dangers inherent with using gas throughout the entire complex."
The EPA had no comment on his remarks.
In New York, a postal workers' union asked a federal judge to issue a court order to shut down and clean up the city's main mail sorting facility, charging that the Postal Service responded inadequately after anthrax microbes were detected on five sorting machines Oct. 25.
"All they were concerned about was moving the mail," William M. Smith, head of New York's Metro Area Postal Union, told Judge John F. Keenen.
Federal lawyers say the sprawling Morgan Distribution and Processing Facility is safe for postal workers and will stay open, a position supported by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The judge is not expected to rule on the case before Friday.
A State Department spokesman said a Pakistani employee opened the Lahore letter as part of the consulate's local mail delivery on Oct. 31.
The envelope was light blue and bore a Pakistani stamp, the spokesman said.
The address was written in English, and there was no return address.
The employee, wearing gloves and a mask, opened the letter and noticed a paper inside folded over a white powder.
He closed the envelope immediately and reported his discovery, the spokesman said.
The consulate sent the envelope to a local laboratory, where it tested positive for anthrax bacteria, the spokesman said.
It was then sent to Fort Detrick.
The spokesman said it was not yet known whether the paper inside the envelope was a letter.
Pakistani authorities say they had confirmed three cases of anthrax contamination in Pakistan before the Lahore letter, including an Oct. 23 letter to the Karachi newsroom of the Daily Jang, an Urdu-language newspaper.
Correspondent Peter Baker in Moscow, special correspondent Colum Lynch in New York and staff writer Rick Weiss contributed to this article. 
Related Links
Campaigning ended this week in one of the most divisive presidential elections in modern French history, with the incumbent, Jacques Chirac, expected to win a second term by a landslide in the final round of voting on Sunday, but enjoying no popular mandate and with many of his prospective voters casting ballots for him reluctantly.
Chirac, a conservative whose party claims the legacy of the late president Charles de Gaulle, emerged as the choice of both the left and right after the extreme right's leader, Jean-Marie Le Pen, unexpectedly took second place in the first round of voting on April 21.
Now even Le Pen has conceded he has little chance of victory, with polls showing Chirac could win 75 to 80 percent of the vote.
"All political logic says Jacques Chirac will win," said Stephane Rozes, of the CSA polling firm.
"He is not the candidate of the right -- he is the candidate of the republic."
Rozes said winning 30 percent of the vote would be "a success" for Le Pen whose views have long been considered outside the political mainstream.
For Le Pen to win 35 percent, Rozes said, would be "an earthquake."
At a news conference today, Le Pen -- a 73-year-old former paratrooper who once called the Holocaust "a detail" of history -- seemed to be preparing his supporters for a mammoth defeat, saying, "A giant electoral fraud operation is being prepared."
He told voters, "Don't let yourselves be intimidated" by the massive outpouring against him, which he said had created a "totalitarian climate."
Chirac, 69, said he recognized the widespread discontent that allowed Le Pen to win nearly 17 percent of the vote on April 21 and reduced his own first-round total to just 19.88 percent, the lowest first-round vote for an incumbent president.
"What is in question is not our institutions, but the ability of the men who are in charge of governing France to listen, understand and act," Chirac said in a radio interview.
"You don't change problems by changing institutions, you do it by attacking problems and solving them."
With a Chirac victory all but certain, all sides appeared to be looking ahead to legislative elections to be held in two rounds on June 9 and 16.
Those elections will determine whether Chirac's anticipated victory Sunday will boost prospects for a center-right parliamentary majority, or whether the parties of the left -- Socialists, Communists and Greens -- have become so energized by two weeks of street protests that they can reverse their humiliating loss in the presidential race and maintain their hold on government.
A key question is whether Le Pen's showing in the presidential race will translate into legislative gains for his National Front party.
Le Pen has always been more popular than his party, but analysts said they fear a strong Le Pen showing on Sunday could improve the party's showing in the parliamentary vote, and perhaps leave the National Front holding the balance of power in as many as 150 of France's 577 legislative districts.
Le Pen himself now seems to have his eye on the parliamentary races.
"We shouldn't resign ourselves if we're beaten," he told a crowd of supporters at his final campaign rally in Marseille Thursday night.
"There are still the legislative elections.
We must complete the victory or make up for the defeat."
Le Pen's unexpected appearance in the runoff has created one of the broadest -- and oddest -- political coalitions imaginable, with Chirac's longtime adversaries, including Communists, environmentalist Greens and even his nemesis, Prime Minister Lionel Jospin, all calling on their supporters to vote for him.
Eric Halphen, an investigating magistrate who spent the past seven years investigating Chirac for corruption, said he believes the president is dishonest, but that he still plans to vote for him, to block Le Pen.
"The choice is obvious, unfortunately," said Halphen, who resigned in disgust as prosecutor when he was removed from the case and when France's highest judicial body, the Constitutional Court, ruled that Chirac was immune from prosecution, or even being called to testify, while serving as president.
"When one candidate is not an advocate of democracy . . . it's necessary to vote for the one who is a democrat," he said in an interview.
France's defending World Cup champion soccer team also came out today to express its distaste at Le Pen.
The team, whose members come from diverse backgrounds, was hailed as an example of France's new multicultural identity when it won the championship in 1998.
The players "are unanimous today in condemning resurgent ideas of racism and exclusion," said team captain Marcel Desailly, of Ghanaian origin, according to the sports newspaper L'Equipe.
Many French students and others said they planned to express their distaste at being forced to vote for Chirac when they go to the polling booth.
Some said they would wear clothespins stuck to their noses.
Others plan to wear prison garb -- suggesting that Chirac should be in jail -- or rubber gloves, reflecting their casting of a "dirty" vote.
But today the council overseeing the election warned that any such overtly political display would be illegal, and could cause votes to be annulled.
A spokeswoman for the council said the law did not allow any such protests at polling stations, and that votes were supposed to remain secret.
Despite the polls, and the predictions of a Chirac landslide, Le Pen's voters still seemed energized, and hoping for a reprise of April 21 when their candidate, capitalizing on voter fears of immigration and rising crime, fared far better than poll predictions.
Le Pen's final rally in a stadium in Marseille was sparsely attended, but the crowd was enthusiastic.
Cecile Jouan, a party youth worker, said, "Of course we believe in victory.
We wouldn't be fighting otherwise.
There is no racism" in the National Front," she added.
"I know two Jewish militants and, look, the singer onstage is black, and she's been with us for years."
Francine, a 61-year-old retiree, said, "Le Pen is a very nice guy.
I'm voting for him because he's the only candidate who cares about pets; it's in his program.
His wife created lots of associations to protect animals.
She also created an association called Children of Iraq.
When she goes there, she wears their clothes and adapts to their culture.
If only they were doing it here.
The Algerians are the worst out of the Arabs; they are the ones who are racist, not us."
The only concern now for Le Pen's opponents is apathy.
With so many polls predicting a Chirac landslide, they said, many voters may not feel inclined to vote at all.
Special correspondent Corinne Gavard in Marseille contributed to this report.
Robbie McGehee became the first driver to crash into the new "soft" walls at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, limping away complaining of left leg pain Sunday.
The wall, being used for the first time on a race track, wasn't in great shape, either.
The bottom steel panel caved in and forced a cleanup that took about 25 minutes.
A little more than three hours into the first practice session for the Indianapolis 500, McGehee lost control of the car as he entered the third turn on the 2 -mile oval.
The rear of the car spun, crashing hard into the wall.
The car then spun back around and hit the wall again, nearly flipping the car.
Debris was scattered across the track.
An ambulance took McGehee to Methodist Hospital and his condition was not immediately available.
The "soft" walls are constructed of four steel panels welded together and cover the concrete walls that line the track.
They are held in place with bolts in the concrete wall and in the back of the steel.
Between the walls are 16 inches of hard, foam insulation that allow the walls to move like a shock absorber.
They're designed to absorb the force of an impact.
The devices were installed last week on the outside walls of all four turns at the track.
McGehee has started three Indy 500s, including an 11th-place finish last year.
He was fifth as rookie in 1999.
Former Indy champ Kenny Brack also brushed the wall Sunday between turns one and two where there are no soft walls.
Brack, who won the race in 1999, continued to practice.
The soft walls are the third such device tried at Indianapolis.
Bucking broomsticks, talking pictures, peripatetic staircases:
Everything is just as you might expect in Chris Columbus's "Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone."
Potter-philes are sure to get what they want ?
if what they want is, in fact, an exacting version of J.K. Rowling's charming children's fantasy.
If it's enchantment they are after, that's quite another matter.
Columbus knows his spells as well as Harry's brainy crony Hermione (Emma Watson), but he doesn't quite have the little wizard's knack for making magic.
Although the director has lovingly re-created the wondrous world of the novel, in the process its whimsy, immediacy and warmth have gone poof. 
After vowing to remain true to Rowling's vision, perhaps he and writer Steve Kloves ("Wonder Boys") were loath to tinker with the book.
Or perhaps with Rowling prowling around the set, they didn't dare.
In any case, the filmmakers haven't reshaped the story to suit the dramatic needs of the new medium.
They didn't write a screenplay so much as cautiously string the book's chapters together like imitation pearls.
Although Harry (Daniel Radcliffe) confronts all manner of exotic demons over the movie's 2 1/2 hours, he defeats the cruelest of these within the first 90 minutes.
Not even the final battle between the hero and the arch-villain, Lord Voldemort, can live up to Harry's earlier escape from his callous Aunt Petunia (Fiona Shaw), his bullying Uncle Vernon (Richard Griffiths) and his bratty cousin (Harry Melling).
The family of "muggles" (Potterspeak for the magically disinclined) reluctantly took in the infant Harry after his mother and father, both wizards, were murdered by Voldemort.
The demonic sorcerer tried to kill Harry, too, but succeeded only in branding a lightning-bolt-shape scar onto the tot's forehead.
Oliver Twist had it better than the world's best-loved wiz kid, who grows up sleeping in a cubbyhole under the closet, doing all the chores and enduring his relatives' verbal abuse.
Petunia and Vernon are not only downright ornery, they never tell him about his true origins.
Then on Harry's 11th birthday, he learns that he is unlike any other boy in the whole wide world.
Hagrid (Robbie Coltrane), a gentle, very hairy giant, delivers the good news along with a letter of acceptance to the Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry.
Then it's off to the Dickensian delights of London's out-of-the-way Diagon Alley, where he is fitted for a wand, and thence schlepped to Platform 9 3/4 to catch the express train for Hogwarts.
Once there, Harry hooks up with the headstrong Hermione Granger and the puckish Ron Weasley (Rupert Grint), fellow first-year students who join the hero's various escapades.
The chief of these, and sadly the dullest, is to foil the theft of the Sorcerer's Stone, a big old red totem that could treble Voldemort's waning powers.
Hagrid assures them that no one can get past the ferocious Fluffy, the slobbering three-headed dog charged with guarding the precious stone.
The wizards-in-training, being as curious as Sherlock Holmes, can't help investigating the matter on their own.
After ruling out the shy, stuttering Professor Quirrell (Ian Hart), Nearly Headless Nick (John Cleese) and the rest of the otherworldlies hanging about, the children decide that the sinister Severus Snape (sneaky, sneery Alan Rickman) is the mastermind behind the plot.
He might even be in league with Voldemort, who has recently been seen sipping unicorn blood in the Forbidden Forest flanking the campus.
Columbus, best known for comic treats like "Mrs. Doubtfire" and the "Home Alone" movies, cut his teeth writing heartwarming scripts for John Hughes.
So it's not surprising that he doesn't know how to direct the many action sequences that form the last half of the movie.
One scene blurs into the next, the changes in mood and rhythm signaled only by John Williams's maddeningly overwrought score.
If the tension starts to build, the moviemakers stand back to admire Stuart Craig's splendid, spooky sets: the magnificent medieval castle that houses Hogwarts; the grand hall lighted by a nebula of candles floating overhead; the haunted corridors attended by the silent vigil of coats of arms.
And then there are the bewitching costumes and the many special effects.
The moviemakers are especially taken by the computer-generated Quidditch match (a field game played on flying broomsticks).
Unfortunately, the video game-like sports event stops the movie in its tracks, and it never quite recovers its momentum.
Though the young actors are appealing, competent and well cast, they haven't enough oomph to make light work of the long journey toward the final credits.
Despite the formidable supporting cast, the kids are mostly on their own as the story struggles toward its climax.
When they're on hand, however, the supporting cast of British stalwarts brings its own charisma to the setting.
Many of them, like Cleese as Nick, John Hurt as the wandmaker, Julie Walters as Ron's mom ? vanish in a wink.
Coltrane's big old bear of a guardian angel is the most memorable of the lot.
However, Richard Harris and Maggie Smith have the biggest of the grown-ups' share as the wise, if imperious, headmaster and deputy headmistress of Hogwarts.
As crowded as the castle is, some characters inevitably are given short shrift.
If they weren't, the movie might never have ended.
Of course, as witches and wizards well know, you can't expect perfection from muggles.
'S STONE (PG, 152 minutes) ?
contains intense sequences.
At area theaters.
Algeria
The death toll from floods and mudslides in the Algerian capital increased dramatically to 750 Wednesday, as authorities switched from seeking survivors to locating bodies and cleaning up debris.
"There is no longer hope of finding survivors," Interior Minister Nourredine Yazid said, even as residents and rescue workers continued digging through mounds of mud on the narrow streets of Algiers.
Officials had put the number killed in the disaster at 585, but announced Wednesday that scores more had been declared dead, raising the toll to 750.
Dozens more people were still missing, and rescue workers searching for the dead were trying to crack mud grown rock-hard since the weekend floods.
Grief-stricken family members filed through two makeshift morgues one for the bodies of men, the other for women set up on the edge of the capital's El Alia cemetery.
Coffins were labeled with the barest of details: "young man," "pregnant woman" or "infant."
Hospital emergency rooms have been overwhelmed by the injured and corridors jammed with people searching for relatives.
Funeral services were being held continually at the El Alia cemetery and the capital's other big cemetery, El Kettar.
Residents say they are furious with what they call the government's lax response to the crisis.
Local newspapers characterized the mood as tense, particularly in the devastated neighborhood of Bab el-Oued, where armed soldiers stood guard and quickly dispersed small groups that gathered for impromptu demonstrations.
"Algiers on High Alert," read Wednesday's front-page headline in the Liberte newspaper.
The torrential, 36-hour downpour began Friday, triggering a mudslide that ripped through several of the hilly capital's working-class neighborhoods, collapsing buildings, blocking roads, overturning vehicles and knocking out power.
The mud was 13 feet deep in the worst-hit areas.
Thousands of families were forced to leave their homes.
Pope John Paul II joined the chorus of those expressing sympathy, sending his condolences to "the dear peoples of Algeria."
"While I entrust to the generous mercy of God all those who have tragically died, I express my spiritual closeness to their families and to all who suffer because of the grave calamity," the pope said Wednesday.
The French government said Tuesday it was sending a cargo plane with tents, beds, blankets and water purification equipment capable of providing drinking water for about 100,000 people per day.
It also was sending four teams of rescue experts and their dogs.
Tunisia also planned to send two planes filled with medicine, blankets and food.
The Algerian government has said it would offer housing and financial assistance to those hardest hit by the devastating rainstorm.
The flood followed a prolonged drought that had forced water-rationing since mid-October.
Skies were overcast Wednesday, and weather forecasts predicted that rain would resume in the evening and last several days.
Ted Koppel has gone on the offensive in an effort to save his embattled program, arguing in an op-ed piece today that the war on terrorism makes "Nightline" more relevant than ever and accusing ABC executives of "malicious" behavior.
"I would argue that in these times, when homeland security is an ongoing concern, when another terrorist attack may, at any time, shatter our sense of normalcy, when U.S. troops are engaged in Afghanistan, the Philippines, Yemen and Georgia, when the likelihood of military action against Iraq is growing ?
when, in short, the regular and thoughtful analysis of national and foreign policy is more essential than ever ?
it is, at best, inappropriate and, at worst, malicious to describe what my colleagues
and I are doing as lacking relevance.
"There are excellent business reasons for the Disney Co. to pursue the Letterman program.
But when 'Nightline' is gone from the ABC schedule, and should the occasion arrive that our work might again seem relevant to the anonymous executive, it will not then be possible to reconstitute what is so easily destroyed.
"
The Times piece marks the only departure from a calculated strategy of silence by Koppel and his team since word leaked Thursday night that ABC is in serious negotiations to land Letterman.
They believe the media debate is playing out in their favor.
For the first time yesterday, there was talk that Letterman, 54, might not replace Koppel, 62, after all.
Two CBS executives predicted the late-night comic will stick with the network because he doesn't want to be portrayed as the man who toppled Ted Koppel.
"We all use others at contract time to jack up the price," said ABC correspondent Sam Donaldson.
"There's nothing un-American about that.
CBS has taken him for granted and suddenly realizes it can't do that."
At the same time, a senior ABC News staffer said, top Disney and ABC executives "miscalculated" by underestimating the wave of criticism that would follow their dismissive comments about "Nightline."
"They got a little bit carried away with their trash talking," the staffer said.
Even if Letterman stays put, those in the news division at ABC believe substantial damage has already been done by the network's criticism of "Nightline."
"People would have understood the economic argument," said one ABC News staffer, who like most of those interviewed declined to be quoted by name because of the sensitivity of the situation.
"The hurtful part of it is being told you're not relevant anymore."
"Everyone understands you've got to negotiate with David Letterman," a network insider said.
"They're just furious about how Ted was thrashed."
In private, Koppel "is very calm and measured," said Donaldson, who has spoken with him several times.
"Ted does not go off half-cocked.
He wants to continue doing his program.
He's also a realist."
Fences would clearly have to be mended.
If "Nightline" stays on the schedule, said the senior staffer, "the Disney people will have to do some public talking to convince people they really believe in the broadcast.
"
"Nightline" has been flooded with supportive e-mails ?
more than 3,200 by yesterday morning ?
and is now asking its fans to send electronic messages to ABC's audience relations unit. "
The support from all of you has been very gratifying, and we will forward on all of those e-mails," Leroy Sievers, executive producer of "Nightline," said in his electronic newsletter.
What might seem like a typical battle of the network stars ?
replacing one multimillionaire with another ? has exploded into a media morality play in which Disney and ABC are being painted as caring little about news.
Some ABC executives have said they respect Koppel and would like to move him to prime time ?
a move he has long resisted ?
but they have portrayed "Nightline" as an aging franchise that has lost its vitality.
The result is that Koppel has become a symbol.
As USA Today put it yesterday: "If 'Nightline's' venerable Ted Koppel isn't safe, is anyone in broadcast news?"'s
Bob Schieffer said on "Face the Nation" that "Nightline" is "as good as any broadcast on television, even if it is on ABC, which is why I don't get why the ABC brass wants to dump it.
As I understand it, they say it doesn't attract enough younger viewers who buy things.
So who is it that buys all these luxury cars and mutual funds?
Teenagers?"
The average age of "Nightline" viewers is 50, the Letterman average about 46.
But that gap can translate into millions of dollars in greater revenue from advertisers who prize a younger audience.
That's why "Nightline" gets little credit for staying competitive in the ratings with Letterman's "Late Show," though behind Jay Leno's "Tonight Show" on NBC.
News President David Westin told his staff Friday that the chances of a Letterman defection were 50-50.
Some ABC News staffers insist Westin has been put in an untenable position.
Since Westin wasn't told of the plan to lure Letterman for the 11:35 p.m. time slot, he appears less influential than his predecessor, Roone Arledge.
But if Westin had been informed in advance, he would have been unable to tell his staff for fear of upsetting the secret Letterman talks.
As the dispute raged on yesterday, Letterman found a way to stay out of the limelight.
He went on vacation.
Staff writer Lisa de Moraes contributed to this report.
U.S. warplanes resumed heavy airstrikes today against Taliban front-line positions north of Kabul and outside the northern city of Mazar-e Sharif, a day after secret talks between the Afghan opposition's defense chief and the U.S. commander in charge of operations in Afghanistan.
Waves of bombing against Taliban targets about 25 miles north of Kabul sent huge clouds of dirt and dust into the clear sky, as F/A-18 Hornet jets and at least one B-52 bomber returned repeatedly after three days of relative calm.
The biggest explosions were believed to be from 1,000-pound bombs intended to pound Taliban bunkers near the front lines close to Bagram air base, six miles south of this opposition-held town.
The intense bombing reflected a conclusion in Washington that U.S. military escalation should not be deterred by the failure to assemble a broad coalition of opponents to the Taliban inside Afghanistan, a senior administration official said.
Previously, U.S. officials said that air attacks on front-line Taliban troops had been restrained in order not to favor rebels of the Northern Alliance, who are rivals of other potential members of a post-Taliban government.
Near Mazar-e Sharif, where Northern Alliance forces have been waging an intermittent offensive against Taliban soldiers in recent weeks, alliance fighters cheered today's heavy bombing by U.S. planes.
"This went very well.
We liked this very much," Kudratulla Umar, an officer with the Northern Alliance forces stalled about nine miles outside the key northern city, said by telephone.
Umar said a decision to try to capture the city was reached by alliance generals in a strategy meeting last weekend.
"We are ready to move toward Mazar-e Sharif, but we are waiting for the Americans to say when to start," he said.
The intensified U.S. bombing of Taliban front lines follows weeks of complaints by Northern Alliance officials that they had not gotten sufficient air support to allow their forces to advance.
According to a senior official in the militia, the alliance's defense chief, Gen. Mohammed Fahim, met Tuesday with Army Gen. Tommy R. Franks, the commander of U.S. operations in Afghanistan.
At the meeting in Dushanbe, the capital of neighboring Tajikistan, the generals discussed closer cooperation between U.S. and alliance forces.
"Our side was happy," the official said of the meeting's outcome.
"It was a venue to discuss broader strategy. . . .
It's become more and more evident that we can play a major role."
The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, forecast an escalation of fighting around Mazar-e Sharif that would include tighter coordination with U.S. forces.
"There could be tactical air support," he said.
"This could be one aspect of it."
Since the start of the U.S. bombing campaign Oct. 7, "a better understanding has been created between us, but it still needs some improvement," the official said. 
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld on Tuesday confirmed previous reports from the field that U.S. troops are working with Northern Alliance forces, saying the "modest number" of troops were helping direct airstrikes and arrange logistical support.
But Umar, the alliance official near Mazar, suggested the United States is much more deeply involved in directing the alliance attack than the Pentagon has acknowledged.
"We have agreed to everything with the Americans to attack cooperatively," he said through an interpreter. "
A person here will coordinate it.
They didn't tell us when the attack will go, so we don't know the exact time yet."
Umar said that when alliance forces get the signal to advance, they will move on foot toward Mazar-e Sharif.
They are waiting for the U.S. bombardment to destroy the tanks and heavier weapons arrayed by the Taliban to protect the city, he said.
Here at the front lines near Bagram, the situation had been relatively quiet following the heaviest bombing of the campaign on Saturday, when a few bombs missed their targets and fell on an alliance-held village.
Initial reports said as many as 10 civilians were killed in two villages in alliance territory and one on the Taliban side during the strikes.
Alliance officials insisted that only one or two civilians had died.
The next day, the Northern Alliance foreign affairs chief, Abdullah, called for better coordination between U.S. and alliance forces to avoid such mistakes and to deny the Taliban fuel for its "propaganda" against the bombing campaign.
The pace of the bombing picked up dramatically today, with the first appearance by a B-52 over the Bagram area.
It flew relatively low -- at about 25,000 feet, some observers here speculated -- and its distinctive outline was clearly visible as it streamed vapor trails from its eight engines.
The bomber made two passes over Bagram and dropped a total of 50 bombs.
Witnesses near Bagram reported at least two dozen heavy explosions from the bombing, including several blasts that sent mushroom clouds billowing into the air.
The heaviest hits were at the Taliban village of Estarghich, beside the road to Kabul, where Taliban forces are reportedly dug in to repel an alliance advance.
The bombing started in mid-morning and continued until after dark.
In far western Afghanistan, an opposition general, Ismail Khan, said his forces reversed an attack by the Taliban without the support of U.S. bombardment.
In a brief telephone conversation, he said they seized a cache of weapons and supplies from the Taliban, including 31 Datsun cars and a variety of machine guns. 
"The situation is not bad here," he said.
"We didn't get any bombing support today.
But we are fighting around Qaleh-ye
Now," about 60 miles northeast of the city of Herat.
"We took a lot of supplies from the Taliban yesterday."
Khan's forces are attempting to cut the road between Herat and Mazar-e Sharif.
If the Northern Alliance takes Mazar-e Sharif, it could gain control of much of northern Afghanistan and open a major supply route into Uzbekistan, where U.S. troops are camped at an Uzbek base.
In Kandahar, the spiritual headquarters of the Taliban, Western reporters were shown a Red Crescent clinic that a doctor said had been bombed before dawn today, killing at least 11 people and wounding at least six.
Journalists found the clinic heavily damaged, but saw no bodies.
The Red Crescent is the Islamic equivalent of the Red Cross.
A crowd gathered at the clinic during the reporters' visit and chanted such slogans as "Down with Bush" and "Down with America." 
In Islamabad, the Taliban ambassador to Pakistan, Abdul Salam Zaeef, asserted that 1,500 people have been killed in the 25 days since U.S. airstrikes began.
U.S. and Northern Alliance officials have alleged that the Taliban is heavily exaggerating the civilian death toll from the U.S. bombings.
But the officials have provided no estimates of their own.
The Pentagon has acknowledged that several airstrikes have missed their targets, causing civilian casualties in Kabul and other cities.
Struck reported from Tashkent, Uzbekistan. 
Related Links
About 3,500 frightened Afghans poured into Pakistan today, U.N. officials and witnesses said, fleeing heavy nighttime attacks by U.S. aircraft on the Taliban stronghold of Kandahar that one refugee described as "horrible, horrible."
The refugees, mostly women and children, walked across the border at the Chaman crossing lugging suitcases and balancing bundles of clothing on their heads.
They were allowed into Pakistani territory despite government orders that the border be sealed to everyone without travel documents.
The exodus marked the highest one-day refugee flow from southwestern Afghanistan since U.S. forces began bombing Taliban targets 13 days ago, according to the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees.
It was seen as a dramatic measure of the ferocity of U.S. airstrikes against Kandahar, a city 120 miles northwest of here that has been the headquarters of Mohammad Omar, leader of Afghanistan's ruling Taliban movement.
As the attacks have intensified, the number of Afghans moving across the border has risen markedly, particularly in the past three days.
The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees estimated that 10,000 have arrived here in Baluchistan province, opposite southwestern Afghanistan, in the last six days, including 2,700 who trudged to the border crossing on Wednesday and Thursday.
The U.N. agency estimated that, despite the border closure, 30,000 Afghans have fled to Pakistan since bombing began Oct. 7, many of them crossing on isolated tracks away from the heavily patrolled official crossings.
They join more than 2 million Afghans already driven into Pakistan by the more than two decades of warfare that has torn the country apart.
Pakistan closed its border in an effort to prevent a flood of new refugees, which aid officials estimate could number a million or more if unchecked.
As part of that effort, those who crossed today were not directed to any specific refugee camp by Pakistani authorities, but were left largely to fend for themselves or seek assistance from friends and relatives in Pakistan.
"Our border monitors reported that about 3,500 people, mostly women and children, entered Pakistan at the Chaman border crossing on Friday," said Fatoumata Kaba, a spokeswoman for the refugee agency.
At the United Nations, Ruud Lubbers, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, said he expected the refugee flight underway to "grow exponentially" in the coming weeks, and he pleaded with Pakistan and Iran to open their borders.
"They are just too strict," Lubbers said.
Blocking the refugees at the borders, he added, is "creating enormous misery, which is unacceptable."
News services quoted refugees as saying that thousands of people were still trying to enter Pakistan.
The accounts could not be verified because the Taliban has largely barred journalists from Afghanistan.
Kaba and refugees interviewed at Chaman said the movement was caused by intense overnight military strikes on targets in and around Kandahar that appeared to have caused panic.
Dad Mohammed, a 38-year-old driver who fled with his family, said he decided to leave Afghanistan today after seeing a U.S. AC-130 gunship fire at Taliban forces.
"It was flying low.
It almost seemed to stop flying and float at one time," he said of the U.S. plane, a modified C-130 transport that carries a 105mm cannon and a Gatling gun that sprays 1,800 bullets a minute. "
Then it began firing.
It was like the plane was breathing fire.
It was horrible, horrible."
Witnesses said the scene at the border crossing was chaotic.
People were entering Pakistan with ashen faces.
It seemed that many had fled hastily.
Agha Mohammed, a 45-year-old merchant, said he witnessed a U.S. strike on a telephone office in Kandahar. "
At least 20 Taliban were killed there," he said.
"All night the Taliban were driving back and forth in their pickup trucks with their rocket launchers and their AK-47s."
Mohammed said that despite the fear, the U.S. assault gave him hope that the Taliban will lose power in Afghanistan.
"They are all under Osama's control," he said, referring to the accused terrorist leader Osama bin Laden, who is being harbored by the Taliban.
"I am leaving until they kill him.
Then I will go back and, no matter what, be a happier man."
Despite the signs of crumbling morale, the main Taliban envoy to the outside world said in Islamabad, the Pakistani capital, that the movement's leadership remains unified, confident and determined never to turn over bin Laden no matter how long the United States bombs Afghanistan.
Ambassador Abdul Salam Zaeef, speaking on his return after a week of consultations in Kandahar, said that despite the U.S. airstrikes and the prospect of imminent ground assaults, the Taliban leadership has decided to hold firm against U.S. demands that it give up bin Laden, because of Islamic principles regarding a guest.
"We have no change in that," he told reporters gathered on the embassy lawn in Islamabad.
"Osama is a faith issue, and we are not going to change our faith."
Zaeef discounted reports that some Taliban officials have indicated to Pakistani intelligence agents they are thinking of defecting.
"There are no moderates, and there are no hard-liners," he said.
"We are one."
He said the Taliban military has suffered few casualties despite the loss of its infrastructure and is awaiting with "patience" the arrival of ground troops to fight back on more equal terms.
"We know this is going to be a long war," he said.
"Therefore, we are going to safeguard our ammunition and our military capabilities."
Despite Zaeef's assertion that Taliban authorities retain control of the country, the Swedish Committee for Afghanistan reported that its aid centers in five Afghan cities have been looted by Taliban militia members and forced to close.
Some staff members who sought to intervene were beaten, according to an official of the committee, Sidney Petersson.
Petersson told reporters the centers are in the northern cities of Mazar-e Sharif, which is under attack by forces of the rebel Northern Alliance; Pol-e Khomri; Kunduz; Taloqan, and Ghazni.
Zaeef also sought to underline Taliban reports that the U.S. bombing is taking a growing toll of civilian casualties.
He said "the majority" of targets hit since Oct. 7 have been civilian, leading to the loss of innocent lives.
An embassy official said about 400 civilians have been killed.
But in Afghanistan, Taliban spokesman Abdul Hai Mutmaen estimated the number between 600 and 800, including people killed today in a residential neighborhood of Kabul, the capital.
Neither estimate could be verified.
Taliban officials have particularly denounced an attack Oct. 11 on the village of Kadam near Jalalabad, in northeastern Afghanistan across the border from Peshawar, where they said 160 to 200 civilians were killed.
Foreign television crews were taken to the area several days later to interview people who said they lost their families.
An Afghan from the area who is hostile to the Taliban movement said Thursday, however, that a small number of people had died, most of them Arabs assigned to guard an ammunition facility.
Taliban officials went to the village before the camera crews arrived to coach residents on what to say, he charged.
Cody reported from Islamabad.
Special correspondent Colum Lynch at the United Nations contributed to this report. 
Related Links
The government approved sophisticated genetic fingerprinting tests Thursday for blood banks to use to further reduce the risk of dangerous viruses slipping into transfusions.
The vast majority of transfusions already are infection-free.
But blood banks have been performing this nucleic acid testing, called NAT, as part of a nationwide experiment since 1999 to see if the more sophisticated method can make the blood supply even safer.
Thursday's approval by the Food and Drug Administration validates NAT testing as adding that extra layer of safety.can detect tiny amounts of the AIDS virus or liver-destroying hepatitis C before the blood donor's body has even recognized the infection.
Some of the tests can detect as few as 10 copies of a viral gene.
Viral genes spread through blood faster than the immune system begins forming antibodies to fight them, a reaction that may not occur until 20 to 80 days after the person is infected.
Yet until now, blood testing has depended largely on tests that detect antibodies in an infected donor.
So newly infected donors occasionally slip through.
Adding nucleic acid testing to the standard battery of blood tests promises to close much of that gap.
In the nationwide studies, nucleic acid testing of an estimated 20 million blood donations caught seven cases of HIV infection and 88 hepatitis C-positive donations blood that otherwise would have slipped through.
Chiron Corp. makes the newly approved test, which it sells under the brand name Procleix.
A New Jersey woman who developed skin anthrax may have become infected by handling a letter that arrived at her office after passing through a contaminated postal facility, which could mark the first known case of such transmission, officials said yesterday. 
A preliminary test on the 51-year-old accountant's mailbox at work came back positive yesterday for anthrax.
If follow-up tests confirm the findings, officials said the spores might have been delivered by ordinary mail that came in contact with letters laden with bacteria that were mailed to news organizations in New York and Senate Majority Leader Thomas A. Daschle's Capitol Hill office.
"A logical assumption would be that there is some sort of cross contamination," said postal inspector Dan Mihalko.
The mail for the woman's workplace passed through a processing facility in Hamilton Township, N.J., believed to have handled the letters to Daschle and New York.
If that is the case, it could open a new dimension in the anthrax crisis: Tens of thousands of homes in Washington and around the country have received mail that may have come in contact with letters containing anthrax by passing through the same postal facilities.
If cross-contaminated letters can carry spores that can make people sick, this could sharply increase the number of people at risk. 
Officials, however, were quick to note that alternate explanations remained for how the woman became infected.
She could have been mailed a letter containing anthrax spores directly, or she could have became infected through other as-yet unknown means at home or work.
Postal Service spokeswoman Kristin Krathwohl called the case "a very isolated incident," adding: "We have no reason at this time to change any of the advice that we're giving to people. . . .
We encourage people to continue following that advice and to basically very carefully wash their hands thoroughly with soap and water after they've handled the mail."
Health investigators believe the contamination in the Brentwood postal facility in Washington was largely confined to the area of the building that handles government mail, said Donna Garland, a spokeswoman for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
That makes it unlikely that residential customers would be at risk for skin anthrax, she said.
The CDC yesterday confirmed the diagnoses of a New York Post editor previously reported to have developed skin anthrax, bringing to 17 the total number of cases of anthrax to have been confirmed.
That includes 10 victims of inhalation anthrax, of whom four died, and seven people who suffered the skin variety.
All but two -- the New Jersey woman and a New York woman who died from the more serious inhalational form of the disease -- have either been postal workers or people who worked at places that received letters containing anthrax spores.
Health and Human Services
Secretary Tommy G. Thompson said it was "a good sign" that authorities had found a clue as to how the New Jersey woman, who has not been identified, had become infected.
Investigators yesterday said there was no word yet on what might have caused inhalation anthrax infection in 61-year-old Kathy T. Nguyen, who died on Wednesday.
Tests in the hospital where Nguyen worked and at her home have turned up negative for anthrax spores.
The New Jersey woman developed an anthrax lesion on her forehead that required her to be hospitalized.
Her diagnosis was confirmed on Monday and she has since been discharged from the hospital. 
The sample that came back positive was taken from the woman's mailbox at her office near Trenton.
Other employees at her unidentified company are believed to be at low risk for cutaneous anthrax and at no risk for inhalation anthrax, CDC officials said.
The CDC yesterday also confirmed that a Kansas City postal center was contaminated and its workers possibly exposed to anthrax, and said the agency planned to send a team of experts to Phoenix to guard against a biological attack during the remainder of the World Series. 
Thompson, meanwhile, said that HHS is negotiating with the British and Russian governments about acquiring stocks of anthrax vaccine.
Health officials said a number of "offshore" producers of the vaccine had been encouraged to get safety approvals from the Food and Drug Administration.
Officials declined to comment on whether the vaccine's intended use was civilian or military: A U.S. company is waiting for clearance to ship millions of doses of the vaccine to the military.
Bradley Perkins of the CDC cautioned that the course of the anthrax scare would not follow the typical course of a biological epidemic: "I think it's a very important point to recognize that this is not a normal epidemic resulting from [a] predictable biologic phenomenon.
This is a criminal activity.
We will remain on high alert, high vigilance until the criminal investigation has identified the people that are committing this crime."
Investigators are trying to determine which laboratory might have been the source of the anthrax bacterium being used in the attacks by checking on inventories and asking about visitors.
The FBI may also eventually sponsor genetic testing on some of the Ames strains housed at U.S. research institutions, experts close to the investigation said.
Such studies could narrow the search for the source of the bacteria used in the recent mail attacks because different samples of the Ames strain in different laboratories can have subtle genetic differences that can serve as unique molecular fingerprints.
Such testing is very sophisticated and could take months to complete if it is ever initiated, experts said.
Staff writers Justin Blum, Ellen Nakashima, Rick Weiss and Ben White contributed to this report. 
Related Links
He had just arrived in Jalalabad for the burial of his elderly aunt, reaching the eastern Afghan city after nightfall Sunday, when the sky started to flash fire.
"We didn't understand.
We thought it was a lightning storm," said Jarwan, 45, an Afghan refugee who lives in this Pakistani city near the Afghan border.
Then came a series of booms, and the roar of planes high overhead, and the answering racket of antiaircraft guns from military posts outside Jalalabad.
Jarwan hid in his relatives' house all night, until the U.S. strikes had died down.
When the family emerged for early morning prayers, all was quiet.
And by 8 a.m., he said, Jalalabad was back to normal.
"The markets were all open, there were lots of cars, people were going about their usual business," recounted Jarwan, who, like many Afghans, uses only one name.
"
The airport had been hit, but not the city.
No one was hurt or killed.
It seemed like the missiles were attacking only targets that were far away."
With the Afghanistan-Pakistan border officially sealed and most telephone service cut off, it was difficult to find other witnesses to confirm Jarwan's account of the first attacks on Jalalabad, one of several major urban areas that have been hit for the past three nights.
The Bush administration is attempting to destroy terrorist training camps allegedly controlled by Osama bin Laden, the prime suspect in the Sept. 11 attacks on the United States.
The airstrikes also are aimed at military and government installations of Afghanistan's ruling Taliban movement, which shelters bin Laden, but U.S. officials say they are avoiding civilian areas as much as possible.
Although damage to Jalalabad from Sunday's attack was minimal, Jarwan said that when he started for home Monday after his aunt's funeral, he encountered hundreds of frightened Afghans fleeing toward the border.
Abandoning their cars before reaching the official checkpoints, he said, they trekked for hours through rugged hills, crossing the border on remote trails into semi-autonomous tribal areas of Pakistan.
"There were so many people that it was as if someone had drawn a solid line across the mountains," Jarwan said.
"The new refugees had no luggage, only the clothes they were wearing.
It was hot and the local people were selling water for money.
"I was just going home, but I know the refugees were frightened because otherwise the men would not allow their women to make that crossing."
Jarwan reached a road and found a ride back to Peshawar, where the father of seven has lived in an urban refugee settlement for 22 years and works as a day laborer.
He said he had no idea what happened to the refugees, only that they had scattered and vanished into hilly tribal areas.
This still-invisible but growing human stream is the focus of frantic preparations being made by the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees here in northwestern Pakistan, where government and U.N. officials say they expect that hundreds of thousands of people could seek sanctuary as the U.S. attacks continue.
For the past week, U.N. crews have been hastily preparing five campsites in different tribal areas along the border, bulldozing the ground flat, digging wells and latrines, and trucking in thousands of tents.
Within the next several weeks, U.N. officials in Peshawar said today, they hope to have shelter ready for 10,000 people at each of the five sites.
"It's a race against time, and the terrain is extremely inhospitable.
This is literally a Death Valley," said Peter Kessler, a spokesman for the U.N. refugee office here.
"There is not even enough water here for the existing population, their animals and their crops, let alone hundreds of thousands of newcomers."
The tribal areas of northwestern Pakistan, a chain of seven self-governing regions along the border, are inhabited by impoverished but fiercely independent peoples and are off-limits to foreigners.
Kessler said many tribal people are angry at the U.S. attacks on Afghanistan and at the prospect of so many refugees entering their territory.
Last week, tribal leaders temporarily forced U.N. crews to stop work at one campsite, and now all crews must be accompanied by armed police.
Kessler said the United Nations had wanted to set up camps in more convenient locations nearer to Peshawar and other population centers, but that the provincial government insisted the sites be confined to remote areas near the border.
Peshawar, 50 miles from the main border crossing, and surrounding North-West Frontier Province are already home to more than a million Afghan refugees.
Many have lived here for years; others arrived last year, fleeing drought and fighting between the Taliban and Afghan opposition forces.
"The government has its concerns.
They don't want troublemakers infiltrating the cities and they want to keep people close to the border, but this is making it extremely difficult for us," Kessler said.
He also expressed concern at a comment made this week by Pakistan's president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, that the government wants to allow only women, children and elderly refugees to enter the country.
Because of protective Afghan customs, he said, "they won't want the women and children to come here alone."
Jarwan, like many other longtime Afghan refugees here, confessed ambivalence about the U.S. attacks.
He said many Afghans do not support the Taliban and are not against the missile strikes in principle, but that they are adamantly opposed to any foreign troops entering their country.
"If the American troops come, every single Afghan will be ready to fight back," he said, sipping tea with a group of elders in his refugee settlement.
The elders nodded in agreement.
"We do not want infidels attacking a Muslim country.
Afghanistan does not belong to the Taliban.
It is our soil and we must defend it."
Related Links
WASHINGTON
The State Department announced the appointment of an expert on the Balkan conflict to serve as U.S. ambassador to anti-Taliban parties in Afghanistan.
Spokesman Richard Boucher said Monday that Ambassador James Dobbins will spend the bulk of his time in the region consulting with the Afghan opposition and with concerned governments in Europe, the Middle East and South Asia.
The ambassador will work closely with Richard Haass, the U.S. coordinator for policy regarding the future of Afghanistan.
Dobbins advised the Clinton administration on Balkan issues and headed the State Department's European bureau for a time.
Meanwhile, the White House left the door open to rewarding Pakistan for its support in the war on terror by cutting U.S. tariffs on Pakistani textiles and apparel.
President Bush "is working with Congress to explore a number of options to assist the Pakistani government," White House press secretary Ari Fleischer said.
"Trade is one way we may be able to assist."
While U.S.-led military efforts in Afghanistan continue, diplomats have been working to forge a broadly representative government to replace the Taliban leadership.
Ethnic, political and religious differences have prevented a unified government from taking hold in Afghanistan for years.
U.S. officials said the political arms of the rebel northern alliance in Afghanistan plan to meet in Turkey in the coming days with groups associated with the dethroned king, Mohammad Zaher Shah.
The exiled monarch, who was forced out in 1973 and lives in Rome, is seen by some as a potential unifying force in the deeply fragmented country.
Various U.S. officials have met with the 87-year-old Zaher Shah in recent weeks.
The last such encounter occurred in late October.
Next Monday, representatives from Afghanistan's six neighbors Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Iran, Pakistan and China as well as the United States and Russia, will meet at the United Nations.
The meeting of the so-called "6 plus 2 group" will be the first since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
All eight members are eager to see evolution toward a representative government that would bring stability to Afghanistan for the first time in a generation.
An administration official said the eight countries will attempt to work out a declaration that expresses the hope that all Afghan parties will work together to build a broadly based government in the post-Taliban era. 
2001
The Associated Press
Nov 10?The triumphant Afghan opposition said they swept Taliban forces from four more northern provinces on Saturday, a day after routing the militia in strategic Mazar-i-Sharif in the first major victory of the U.S.-led war.
The Taliban conceded they had lost the city to the Northern Alliance in their biggest blow since U.S. air strikes began 35 days ago to flush out Saudi-born militant Osama bin Laden, blamed for the suicide hijack attacks in the United States in September that killed some 4,600 people.
Pakistan's Dawn newspaper quoted bin Laden as making the startling claim that he had nuclear and chemical weapons and was ready to unleash them in response to U.S. attacks.
The authenticity of the interview could not be verified.
Mazar-i-Sharif could give U.S. forces a base, since it has the main airport in northern Afghanistan.
It also would let them supply the poorly equipped alliance forces to the south as the city straddles routes between the capital Kabul and Uzbekistan.
"Yes, Mazar has gone," Taliban Defence Minister Obaidullah Akhund told Reuters in a brief interview.
Forces of ethnic Uzbek warlord General Abdul Rashid Dostum entered the city late on Friday as Taliban fighters fled, coming under blistering attack from U.S. warplanes and leaving in their tracks burnt-out trucks and armoured personnel carriers, said Northern Alliance spokesman Ashraf Nadeem.
Opposition troops swept east into Samangan province, leaving a pocket of Taliban fighters in Tashgurghan town, and took three western provinces after fierce fighting and the capture of many Taliban fighters, including Pakistanis, commanders said.
"Today we have captured Samangan, Sara-i-Pol, Faryab and Jowzjan provinces," Dostum told Reuters by satellite telephone.
He said the northern border with Uzbekistan that snakes along the Amu Darya river?the Oxus of the ancients -- remained closed but was under his control.
United Nations aid agencies could return, Nadeem said.
Dostum said his troops were advancing on western Badghis -- a move that would allow him to join up with those of mujahideen General Ismail Khan near the strategic western city of Herat.
A spokesman for Khan, Sayed Naseer Mohammad, said they were planning a Sunday night attack on Qala-i-
Nau, the capital of Badghis that sits on the road from Mazar-i-Sharif to Herat.
Herat, in turn, is on the main road to southern Kandahar, power base of Taliban supreme leader Mullah Mohammad Omar.
Shi'ite Commander Ustad Mohakik told Reuters the Northern Alliance, a disparate group of friends and former foes, killed 500 Taliban in 24 hours of battles in the north.
"In some areas there was strong resistance, others fell without much fighting," he said.
Those numbers, as well as the gains, were impossible to verify and both sides often exaggerate battlefield death tolls.
Taliban officials denied they had lost the provinces, AIP said.
The opposition had captured many Taliban fighters, including Pakistanis, Mohakik said, adding that prisoners would not be harmed and Taliban who surrendered would be treated well.
"We will keep them for future prisoner swaps," he said.
The Taliban forces had regrouped at Tashgurghan, some 60 km (40 miles) east of Mazar-i-Sharif, but it was not clear what they hoped to achieve, Mohakik said.
Alliance Foreign Minister Abdullah Abdullah told reporters in northern Khoja Bahawuddin his forces were eager to take the town of Taloqan that could open the way to Tajikistan, where stockpiles of Russian weapons await a route to the Alliance.
Northern Alliance Interior Minister Yunis Qanuni told Reuters the local population, mainly ethnic Uzbeks who have little love for the mostly ethnic Pashtun Taliban, aided his forces.
"The people of Mazar-i-Sharif helped us.
They captured some of the Pakistani and Arab soldiers and handed them over to us," he said, referring to foreign fighters of bin Laden's al Qaeda network who are thought to number several thousand in the north.
Taliban Information Ministry official Abdul Hanan Himat said the militia, which faced a relentless eight-day U.S. bombardment, was preparing a counterattack to retake the city.
"For the protection of our forces, our war machine and equipment and prevention of civilian casualties, the leadership ...and the Defence Ministry deemed it necessary to pull out," he said, adding the retreat was orderly and without casualties.
The city was for more than a decade the base of Dostum before taken by the Taliban three years ago.
Civilians were hacked to death in that 1998 battle as the Taliban avenged their bloodiest defeat when they tried to capture the city in 1997.
Within hours, U.S. jets resumed their punishing raids on front lines near Kabul and in the far north, witnesses said.
Frontline fighters also engaged the Taliban with heavy artillery fire near Deshtiqala in the north near Tajikistan.
Planes dropped more than 20 bombs on trenches some 200 metres from the opposition-held Bagram airport, 25 km (15 miles) north of Kabul, as about a dozen tanks rolled forward.
Hundreds of troops, backed by tanks and artillery, had been deployed at the airport in a planned assault to take nearby Taliban positions that have made the airport unusable.
The opposition has said it would not march into Kabul if it gets that far, but would halt outside the city, where it is hated for the internecine battles for power in the early 1990s that killed about 50,000 residents.
U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell said Washington was not encouraging the Northern Alliance to take the capital.
A look at elections and ballot measures around the country Tuesday.
San Francisco voters were to decide two proposals to acquire local operation of Pacific Gas and Electric Co. and provide power to city.
PG E spent more than $1 million fighting the measures.
San Francisco voters overwhelmingly approved a $100 million bond issue to pay for solar power in public buildings.
They were also deciding whether to authorize the board of supervisors to underwrite renewable energy projects in homes and businesses without voter approval.
Voters in Carson, a Los Angeles suburb, decided whether to secede from troubled Los Angeles Unified School District.
With 772,000 children, district is nation's second-largest after New York.
Voters rejected a proposal to let the state spend $50 million to create prototype for monorail that would link Denver and Rocky Mountain resorts.
Hartford Democrat Eddie Perez, community activist and ex-Trinity College official, won election as Hartford's first Hispanic mayor.
Three people vied to succeed Waterbury's Republican Mayor Philip Giordano.
He had planned not to seek re-election and is now jailed on federal charges of forcing sex on minors.
A recount was under way to decide who would face former Mayor Maurice Ferre in a runoff next Tuesday: Manny Diaz, an attorney who represented the Miami relatives of Elian Gonzalez, or incumbent Mayor Joe Carollo.
Miami Beach voters decided whether unmarried city employees with partners, heterosexual or gay, qualify for domestic partnership benefits.
Robb Pitts and Shirley Franklin were front-runners in field of five in nonpartisan race to succeed term-limited Atlanta Mayor Bill Campbell.
About 50 voters in newly incorporated Vedic City elect Bob Wynne, running unopposed for mayor.
Wynne helped found community of followers of Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, who brought Transcendental Meditation to Iowa.
Portland residents voted on nonbinding resolution on whether city should endorse universal health care.
Measure drew drawn fierce opposition from health insurers, who have mounted television ad campaign.
Boston Mayor Thomas Menino easily won re-election against City Councilor Peggy Davis-Mullen in nonpartisan contest.
Kwame Kilpatrick, state House Democratic leader, and City Council President Gil Hill vied to succeed Detroit Mayor Dennis Archer, who is pursuing other interests.
Race is nonpartisan.
Gay bias referendums in three cities: Huntington Woods voters decided whether to keep ban on anti-gay bias, which city commission adopted this year.
Kalamazoo and Traverse City voters asked whether to amend city charters to bar officials from approving such protection for gays.
In Dearborn, 16-year incumbent Mayor Michael Guido defeated Abed Hammoud, an assistant Wayne County prosecutor.
After Sept. 11, Hammoud, a Lebanese immigrant in a community where 20 percent of the 98,000 residents are Arab-American, put out flier denouncing the terror attacks and proclaiming pride in his U.S. citizenship.
Political novice R.T. Rybak defeated Minneapolis Mayor Sharon Sayles Belton, city's first black and first female chief executive, in nonpartisan race.
Seeking to follow outgoing St. Paul Mayor Norm Coleman, who plans to run for U.S. Senate, were state Sen. Randy Kelly and City Councilman Jay Benanav.
A field of 14 rivals vied to replace Lee County Sheriff Harold Ray Presley, cousin of Elvis Presley, who was killed in shootout.
In the field was Harold Presley's brother, Larry W. Presley, a retired Tupelo police officer.
Interim Hinds County District Attorney Faye Peterson sought to become state's first elected black female prosecutor.
She was named to fill vacancy when Ed Peters retired.
State law requires a nonpartisan election to complete his term.
Her opponent was former assistant district attorney Bryan Buckley.
Jim McGreevey coasted past GOP challenger Bret Schundler, becoming the state's first Democratic governor since 1989.
McGreevey succeeds acting Gov. Donald DiFrancesco, finishing Christie Whitman's term after President Bush put her in charge of Environmental Protection Agency.
All 120 seats in Republican-controlled state Assembly and Senate up for election.
In each house, Republicans hold 10-seat majority.
Candidates include Lou Gallagher, Democrat and Navy SEAL reservist.
Since he left Oct. 9 for a covert mission, his wife, Karen, has waged his bid to unseat Republican state Sen. Diane Allen of Florence.
Atlantic City Mayor James Whelan outpolled City Councilman Lorenzo Langford 4,202 to 4,145.
But Langford said that more than 1,500 unopened absentee ballots would propel him past Whelan.
The count was to continue Wednesday.
Billionaire media mogul Michael Bloomberg, a Republican, beats veteran consumer activist Mark Green, a Democrat, in the race to succeed term-limited Mayor Rudolph Giuliani.
Charlotte Mayor Pat McCrory, a Republican, defeated former City Council member Ella Scarborough.
McCrory also soundly defeated the Democrat in 1999.
In Raleigh, Republican incumbent Paul Coble conceded to ex-councilman Charles Meeker, a Democrat, in mayoral runoff.
Only 962 votes separated the two, and absentee and provisional ballots remained to be counted.
Jane Campbell, a county commissioner, became Cleveland's first female mayor.
She turned back Raymond Pierce, a deputy assistant education secretary in the Clinton administration, in nonpartisan contest.
Incumbent Charlie Luken defeated challenger Courtis Fuller to become Cincinnati's first directly elected mayor in 76 years.
Luken weathered criticism of his handling of riots last spring sparked by the shooting of an unarmed black man by a white policeman.
Pittsburgh Mayor Tom Murphy, a Democrat, easily won third term against Republican James Carmine, a philosophy professor.
Philadelphia District Attorney Lynne Abraham, once called "America's Deadliest D.A." because of her zeal for the death penalty, won a landslide victory over three little-known challengers.
In York, three candidates each hoped to succeed Mayor Charlie Robertson, who's been charged with murder in black woman's death during 1969 race riots.
Defying state law and court saying he can't be mayor of Scranton, convicted felon Robert Bolus, a Republican, opposed Democratic Councilman Chris Doherty in race for mayor.
Bolus, who says he's innocent, has record that includes receiving stolen machinery for his trucking firm.
Rhyming Judge J. Michael Eakin, a Republican, ran for state Supreme Court against fellow Superior Court colleague Judge Kate Ford Elliott, a Democrat, to replace retiring Chief Justice John P. Flaherty Jr.
Eakin sometimes delivers opinions in verse, like this on divorcing couple's dispute over prenuptial pact: "A deal is a deal, if fairly undertaken, and we find disclosure was fair and unshaken."
Spartanburg Mayor James Talley sought third term against literally everyone else in town.
He botched petition to get his name on the ballot, meaning election depended entirely on write-in votes.
Any of city's 23,000 registered voters could win.
Former Austin city councilman Gus Garcia trounces a large field of challengers to become the first elected Hispanic mayor of Texas' capital city.
Garcia will serve out the unexpired term of former Mayor Kirk Watson, who resigned to run for Texas attorney general.
Houston Mayor Lee Brown, city's first black chief executive, sought third term in nonpartisan contest against five challengers.
Houston voters also decided ballot proposal to bar city from giving benefits to gay domestic partners.
Voters statewide were to decide 19 constitutional amendments, including proposal to create Texas Mobility Fund.
It would let Texas borrow money for new and improved roads needed for growing population.
Separate measure would build roads in poor communities on Mexico border known as "colonias."
Voters approved a constitutional change that would require the governor to call a special legislative session to appoint presidential electors under certain circumstances.
The change was inspired by last year's close presidential election.
Democrat Mark Warner defeated Republican Mark Earley in the race to succeed term-limited Gov. Jim Gilmore.
Warner is the first Democrat to win a statewide election in Virginia since 1994.
All 100 seats in the House of Delegates are up for election; Republicans hold two-seat edge.
Rivals in Seattle's nonpartisan mayoral race were County Councilman Greg Nickels and City Attorney Mark Sidran.
Statewide citizen Initiative 773 would raise tobacco tax to $1.42 1/2 a pack, nation's highest.
Another proposal, Initiative 747, would prevent property taxes from rising more than 1 percent a year unless voters approved larger increase.
2001
The Associated Press
Five days from now, this city will elect its next mayor.
Not that anyone would know it walking the streets.
Campaign posters are few and residents have plenty of other things on their minds, from frightening anthrax cases and vague warnings of further terrorist mayhem to the Yankees' stirring World Series comeback.
So it appears Public Advocate Mark Green -- who holds a solid, though perhaps narrowing, lead over Democrat-turned-Republican businessman Michael Bloomberg -- will claim Gracie Mansion with little fanfare.
But while New Yorkers may be shrugging off the campaign finale, the outcome is far from insignificant: The next mayor will inherit the massive rebuilding effort in Lower Manhattan, a looming budget crisis and a school system that continues to struggle.
"Whoever gets the job," Manhattan resident Mary Imperato said one recent afternoon in Greenwich Village, "is going to have a very tough time."
Should Green, 56, maintain his lead and defeat Bloomberg, who has spent more than $40 million of his immense fortune saturating city airwaves with ads but has made a virtually commensurate number of verbal missteps, New York will wake up in January to find itself governed by a man who entered politics as the trusted, corporate-bashing sidekick of consumer advocate Ralph Nader and whose efforts to rally congressional interns against the Vietnam War got the intern program shut down for three years.
But those days are long gone.
The brainy Harvard Law School graduate and onetime co-host of CNN's "Crossfire" ran to the right in the Democratic primary and even now occasionally winds up to the right of Bloomberg on city budget issues.
Green has promised to keep taxes down to spur business growth, to hold bad teachers accountable and to maintain Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's approach to crime fighting (even though as public advocate he hounded the GOP mayor relentlessly over police brutality).
Giuliani is barred by law from seeking a third consecutive term.
On social issues, Green hews tightly to the left, a necessity in New York politics.
He supports gay marriage, for instance, and strongly backs abortion rights.
But on most municipal matters, he has vowed to continue the Giuliani legacy.
He secured the endorsement of William Bratton, Giuliani's former police commissioner, inoculating himself from charges of being soft on crime.
He supports reforming welfare and abolishing parole.
And today Green appeared side by side with former president Bill Clinton, whom he once advised.
"We were young men together in public service," Clinton said this afternoon, outside the Spoonbread Too restaurant in Harlem.
(Clinton had chicken and ribs;
Green a jerk chicken platter.)
"He's got a good program on the economy, on security, and I especially like a lot of his proposals on education, particularly the expansion of after-school programs along with smaller classes for children in the early grades."
And to the extent they think of him at all -- interviews around town suggest a basic familiarity with Green but little affection for him -- members of corporate New York do not appear to fear that Green will take the city on a nightmare ride back to the bad old days of the 1970s by dramatically boosting public spending or radically raising taxes.
"Obviously there is some sadness associated with Giuliani leaving," said Michael Lemberg, a 29-year-old telecom executive in Manhattan.
"And we hope he'll be back in 2005.
But Green certainly doesn't appear to be a real tree-hugging liberal."
Fred Siegel, a senior fellow at the Progressive Policy Institute, a moderate think tank, said many in New York's financial elite are, in fact, somewhat nervous about a Green mayoralty.
Not because they fear the public advocate's policies, he said, but because they don't like his manner, which can suggest a smug self-satisfaction.
"People have long memories of Green as the perpetual smart [guy]," Siegel said.
"What real estate and financial people are wondering is, 'Can I sit across the table from this guy?
Can we talk?' . . .
The trouble with Green is he always thinks he's smarter than you, and he lets you know it right away."
In addition to New York's tendency to elect Democrats, Green also appears to be getting something of a boost, if it can be called that, from the Sept. 11 attacks.
The city faced diminishing tax revenues before the attacks and now has even bigger problems that will require a great deal of political skill to keep state and federal funds flowing into the city.
"You are going to have a heck of a lot less money coming in, and you're going to have to negotiate a great deal with Albany and Washington," said Maurice Carroll, director of the Quinnipiac University Polling Institute.
Carroll noted that Green scores far higher in polls than Bloomberg, 59, on political experience, a factor perhaps made more important by the attacks.
But while Green has held a steady lead over Bloomberg since defeating Bronx Borough President Fernando Ferrer in the Democratic primary runoff last month, there are indications that Bloomberg's campaign ads are taking a toll on Green.
Imperato, the Manhattan resident who suggested that whoever wins would have a hard time, said she decided to vote for the Republican because, as a businessman, he could create new jobs (a constant theme of Bloomberg's ads) and because Green was "arrogant" in saying that he could have done as good a job, or better, than Giuliani has in helping New York rebound -- the subject of a stinging Bloomberg attack spot.
Still, voters here remain preoccupied with the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks.
Brooklynite Tessy Eros, a hotel and restaurant management student, summed up the collective consciousness.
"There is just a lot of confusion right now," she said, taking a break from studying.
"It's very difficult to concentrate on this race and make it any kind of a priority."
Related Links
Prosecutors today dropped serious criminal charges against 12 firefighters involved in a clash with police officers at the site of the destroyed World Trade Center, said an attorney for several of the defendants.
Charges against two firefighters were dropped entirely while all felony charges -- including incitement to riot -- were dropped against 10 others who still face misdemeanor counts, including criminal trespassing and obstruction of governmental administration, the attorney said.
The 12 were arrested Friday after several allegedly punched police and tossed aside barricades during a protest called to criticize the city's decision to reduce the number of police and fire personnel searching for human remains in the rubble at ground zero.
Five police officers were injured in the scuffle, and Police Commissioner Bernard B. Kerik and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani sharply criticized the firefighters, who lost 343 of their own in the Sept. 11 terrorist attack.
New York firefighters, along with many police officers, are angry over the city's decision to reduce to 75 the number of police and fire personnel searching for remains.
Giuliani has said that management of the site is "out of control" and that it is unsafe for police officers and firefighters to continue working on the piles.
Many firefighters believe the city is simply trying to save money.
Giuliani, meanwhile, made a rare trip out of the city, flying to Phoenix to watch his beloved Yankees in Game 6 of baseball's World Series.
The mayor and families of several Sept. 11 victims flew on a chartered jet provided free by Continental Airlines.
Major League Baseball donated tickets, and Marriott provided lodging for the families.
Giuliani's office said the mayor would stick around for a possible Game 7 but also noted that the mayor did not think such a game would be necessary.
2001
The Washington Post Company
President Vladimir Putin, sounding an optimistic note on the eve of his first summit with President Bush in the United States, said there has been "movement toward a compromise" linking significant cuts in the two countries' nuclear arsenals with changes to the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty.
Without specifying the terms of an agreement, Putin indicated he was prepared to change certain aspects of the treaty to allow the Bush administration to proceed with testing for a missile defense system.
But he said the United States has yet to present him with specific proposals.
Even so, he said, "I'm very optimistic."
Linking arms cuts to a modified ABM Treaty, he added, "is the correct approach."
Looking ahead toward a strategic arms deal that seemed a remote possibility only a few months ago, Putin said he had not changed his view of the ABM Treaty as a "cornerstone of international security."
But, he added, Russia has also come "to recognize the justified concerns of the United States."
One day before flying to Washington for the summit, Putin commented on the treaty during a wide-ranging interview at the Kremlin with The Washington Post and 10 other U.S. news organizations.
For more than two hours, Putin also discussed such topics as the lessons of the failed Soviet occupation of Afghanistan and the risk of Russia's overdependence on oil revenue.
But he repeatedly returned to his central theme since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks against the United States -- that it is time for Russia to end its isolation from the West and become a "full-fledged member of the international community."
Putin denied that he expects "transient benefits" or concessions from the United States in exchange for Russia's cooperation.
He again strongly backed the U.S.-led strikes against Afghanistan's ruling Taliban militia, adding, "Terrorism must be eradicated, expunged, eliminated, and not just in Afghanistan but throughout the world."
Putin outlined several goals of his shift toward the West, including a relationship with NATO that would give Russia the chance to participate in the alliance's decision-making process.
The current Russian relationship with NATO, he said, is based on an outdated joint permanent council, set up in 1997, that should be replaced.
"Today that body is insufficient to improve the quality of our relationship," Putin said, insisting that from now on Russia could promise to be "effective and energetic" in assisting NATO only if given a say in decisions before they were made.
Russia is prepared to reconsider its previous opposition to NATO expansion to include the three former Soviet Baltic states, he added, but only if that, too, is linked to a significant improvement in Russia's relationship with NATO.
The key, he said, is "to look beyond the old Cold War cliches and adopt a new world outlook."
Even as he turns toward the West, Putin refused to renounce Russia's extensive dealings with several countries that the United States has condemned for seeking to obtain weapons of mass destruction, including North Korea and Iraq.
As for the U.S.-led war in Afghanistan, Putin touted the "very valuable intelligence information" that Russia has contributed, along with "tens of millions of dollars" in weapons he said Russia has supplied to the Northern Alliance fighting the Taliban.
Referring to the Northern Alliance's capture of the key northern city of Mazar-e Sharif on Friday, Putin said, "The situation in Afghanistan has been developing as we expected.
The Northern Alliance has launched the operations it was planning, and is now effectively taking the entire northern part of Afghanistan under control."
Commenting on accused terrorist Osama bin Laden's reported statement that he has weapons of mass destruction, Putin struck a cautious note.
"I don't think we should exaggerate the existing danger. . . .
At the same time it would be a mistake to understate the scope of the risk," he said, citing what he said were bin Laden's close ties to radical groups in Pakistan, which has nuclear weapons.
Putin also categorically denied that terrorists could obtain nuclear weapons originating in Russia or the former Soviet Union.
"It's unlikely that the terrorists in Afghanistan have weapons of mass destruction," he said.
"In any case, they can't be of Soviet or Russian origin, I'm absolutely sure of that."
Putin also argued that Russia's war against Islamic rebels in the breakaway republic of Chechnya is an important front in the war against international terrorism.
He claimed that if the Russians were not fighting there, more radical Islamic "mercenaries" would head to Afghanistan to fight the Americans.
Putin said more than 500 such "mercenaries" had been killed in Chechnya and that his intelligence data indicated that between 500 and 700 "Islamic terrorists" are fighting in the region.
Putin is scheduled to arrive in Washington on Monday.
He plans to meet with Bush there at at the president's ranch in Crawford, Tex.
U.S. and Afghan sources said that anti-Taliban forces took control of the eastern city of Jalalabad and there were further conflicting reports about control of the airport outside the Taliban stronghold of Kandahar. 
Meanwhile, Taliban soldiers at the Pakistan border said the city was still in Taliban hands. 
Neither side's version of events could be independently confirmed.
Still, in neighboring Tajikistan, the Northern Alliance ambassador said the Taliban's power center had fallen to the opposition.
"Today the forces of the Northern Alliance entered Kandahar," ambassador Said Ibrahim Hikmat said.
Meanwhile, Alliance Foreign Minister Abdullah Abdullah earlier told Iran's state television: "There is complete chaos in Kandahar.
It's absolute confusion.
The Taliban have lost control of the situation and no Taliban officials are to be found.
"
The various claims could not be independently verified but, if true, they would represent an enormous setback for the Taliban and the al Qaeda network.
In a briefing at the Pentagon, Rear Adm. John Stufflebeem said that anti-Taliban groups in the south were rebelling against Taliban control near Kandahar.
However, he said the outcome was not yet clear.
Meanwhile, Pakistani Taliban soldiers, some wounded, trickled across the Pakistan border, saying the fundamentalist Islamic group was still firmly in charge of their southern Afghan stronghold of Kandahar.
"There are about 40,000 or 50,000 Taliban in Kandahar.
We are making strong defensive positions," Din Mohammad, bearded and clad in the Taliban's trademark turban, told Reuters at the Chaman border crossing.
Mohammad, who said he was returning to Pakistan to see his family, tell them he was all right and recruit more fighters for the Taliban cause, said the militia was regrouping.
The reported collapse of Kandahar followed the Northern Alliance's seizure of the capital Kabul and the domino-like fall or defection of towns and provinces that reduced the Taliban's control from 90 percent of the country to 20 percent in just five days.
But military analysts expected the Taliban, aided by al Qaeda, to take to Afghanistan's impenetrable mountains in a guerrilla war reminiscent of the hit-and-run campaigns that drove the occupying Soviet army from the country in 1989.
In other battlefield developments, an anti-Taliban group seized control of the eastern city of Jalalabad, an area which housed al Qaeda training camps, Pakistan-based Afghan Islamic Press said.
Four northeastern provinces also slipped from Taliban hands after local uprisings, officials and tribal leaders said.
"Now the Taliban have less than 20 percent of the territory of Afghanistan," opposition Northern Alliance Interior Minister Yunis Qanuni told Reuters.
World leaders were trying to assemble a multinational peacekeeping force and plans for a transitional government for a country racked by civil war since the former Soviet Union invaded on Christmas Day 1979 to back communist rule in the Muslim country.
Diplomats were converging on Afghanistan's southern neighbor, Pakistan, to hammer out post-Taliban rule.
U.N. envoy to Afghanistan
Fransesc Vendrell was in the Pakistani capital, Islamabad, waiting to go to Kabul to meet Northern Alliance leaders as soon as U.N. security officials give him clearance that it is safe.
He is expected to push a U.N. plan envisaging a two-year interim government bringing all ethnic groups under one umbrella with a multinational security force to protect them.
The Federal Aviation Administration planned to require fleetwide inspections of Airbus A300 planes as soon as Thursday, focusing on the tail that sheared off in Monday's plane crash.
Ninety planes would be covered by the FAA's order.
Three U.S. airlines American and cargo carriers FedEx and United Parcel Service fly the European-built plane.
"It's the first time we've ever had a vertical tail fall off, in my memory, particularly on a modern jetliner," said Jim Hall, former National Transportation Safety Board chairman.
spokesman Les Dorr said the agency expected to issue the order Thursday but was still working out whether the planes would be grounded until they were inspected, how much time the airlines could take to do the required checks, and whether areas of the planes besides the tails would have to be examined.
Chairwoman Marion Blakey said American was doing sample inspections among its remaining 34 Airbus A300s to ensure there are no problems with other tail assemblies.
They are made out of composite materials nonmetal, graphite-like substances that are lighter than aluminum.
Dorr said the FAA was working closely with Airbus, French authorities and the three U.S. airlines to develop the procedures for inspecting the planes.
The 27-foot fin of Flight 587, found in New York's Jamaica Bay, had been ripped off the fuselage cleanly.
The crash killed 265 people.
"It came off so cleanly, there may have been a structural failure there," said David Stempler, president of the Air Travelers Association, an industry group.
Afghanistan, Nov 6?Afghanistan's Taliban rulers paraded what they said were parts of a downed U.S. helicopter through the streets of war-shattered Kabul on Tuesday in a show of defiance on the 31st day of Washington's air assault.
After dark a U.S. warplane fired two missiles into central Kabul sending up a column of smoke and dust behind a school.
"There was a bang, a whizzing sound and then another explosion," said Reuters correspondent Sayed Salahuddin.
Earlier, U.S. planes attacked Taliban guns bearing down on an opposition-held airfield north of the capital and the opposition claimed a battlefield victory near the northern city of Mazar-i-Sharif.
"Their attack here will soon share the fate of this aircraft," a Taliban fighter shouted through a loudspeaker as the wreckage was driven through Kabul.
"Don't worry we will defeat the Americans and their allies," he said.
Thousands of residents came out onto the street to see the metal parts and two tyres, mounted on the back of a vehicle.
A Taliban official told Reuters the helicopter was shot down in Ghazni province on Saturday.
The Pentagon has denied an aircraft was downed.
It said bad weather forced a helicopter to crash.
All crew were rescued and the craft destroyed by fighter jets to prevent the Taliban taking sensitive equipment.
To the north of Kabul, U.S. fighter planes targeted tanks and artillery overlooking Bagram airbase, which is held by opposition Northern Alliance forces.
Ten explosions could be seen around Kubacha and Mirsambat in the morning as warplanes flew high above the Shomali plain for about an hour.
An Alliance commander welcomed the use of B-52 heavy bombers to pound strips of ground and carpet-bomb small areas, but Taliban reinforcements have been reported arriving at the front in their hundreds almost every day.
Washington appears to be putting pressure on the Alliance to seize the initiative and take some territory from the Taliban, but the army is ill equipped for an all-out offensive and there have been few real signs of an impending push.
The Northern Alliance Foreign Minister Abdullah Abdullah said his forces north of Kabul were ready but he did not say when an offensive would start.
"We don't need more time in order to be more prepared militarily," he told the BBC.
An opposition commander said forces had won ground in a slow-moving campaign to recapture Mazar-i-Sharif.
But they were bogged down near the western city of Herat against entrenched Taliban positions.
"Our forces have captured upper and lower Keshendeh villages in today's fighting," Ustad Muhakik, one of three veteran commanders battling to take Mazar-i-Sharif, told Reuters.
Keshendeh lies 40 km (25 miles) south of Mazar-i-Sharif.
The area has changed hands several times since May in clashes between the Taliban and forces loyal to General Abdul Rashid Dostum.
Muhakik said 400 Taliban had defected to Alliance forces who recovered a large amount of Taliban weapons and ammunition.
The opposition has tried to take Mazar-i-Sharif and sever Taliban supply lines to western Afghanistan and central Asia.
The Pakistani-based Afghan Islamic Press (AIP) agency said five people were killed in the fighting in Zari Bazar in northern Balkh province.
There was no independent confirmation.
said U.S. bombing had killed a total 633 civilians and wounded up to 1,000 in the first 29 days of the campaign.
The Taliban have said 1,500 civilians have been killed.
The United States rejects Taliban civilian casualty figures as exaggerated.
The Pentagon has brought in Vietnam-era B-52 bombers to carpet-bomb Taliban front lines.
U.S. media reported this week the air force had also dropped the biggest bomb in its arsenal, the 15,000-pound "Daisy Cutter."
The bomb, which is the size of a small car, was used in the Vietnam war to clear ground for helicopters.
The Pentagon has refused to confirm or deny the reports.
The United States has troops on the ground directing the bombing and the Pentagon says it believes a substantial number of Taliban have been killed.
The Pentagon said the bombing had driven Osama bin Laden's al Qaeda guerrillas into hiding.
The U.S. began bombing Afghanistan on October 7 to punish the Taliban for sheltering the Saudi-born leader, prime suspect in the September 11 attacks on the United States that killed some 4,800 people.
People infected with the AIDS virus who take antiretroviral drugs don't appear to have an increased risk of having heart attacks or strokes, at least in the short run, according to a new study from the nation's veterans hospitals.
The issue is important because AIDS drugs, especially those in the protease inhibitor family, are known to sometimes increase blood concentrations of cholesterol, triglyceride and glucose, all of which, in turn, increase vascular disease risks.
Scattered reports of AIDS patients who controlled their viral infections, only to suffer heart attacks a few years after starting antiretroviral therapy, have circulated widely.
Worry about the medicines' long-term hazards is one of the reasons that AIDS specialists recommend starting them later in the course of infection than they did in the past.
On the last day of the 9th Annual Retrovirus Conference, a researcher described the experience of 37,000 people with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection treated through the Department of Veterans Affairs medical system.
From 1993 through last June, the patients had received 1.4 million prescriptions for antiretroviral drugs.
They took the drugs, on average, for three years.
The VA patients' death rate from all causes fell 75 percent.
At the same time, hospitalizations for heart disease and stroke -- and deaths from those conditions -- dropped by 10 percent to 20 percent.
The downward trend of vascular disease was also seen in subpopulations of patients at higher risk: those with existing heart problems, people over age 55, and diabetics.
"We don't think fear of vascular complications should inhibit prescribing of antiretroviral medicines," said Samuel A. Bozzette, a physician with the VA hospital in San Diego.
A study of HIV-positive men enrolled in the Northern California branch of the Kaiser Permanente HMO showed similar results.
People on or off combination antiretroviral therapy, and people taking protease inhibitors or not, all had roughly the same rates of heart attack and angina over the course of five years.
As a group, however, the HIV-infected men had a somewhat higher risk of heart problems compared with uninfected men in the HMO.
The risk-factor profiles of the populations were different, but that didn't seem to tip the HIV-infected men into a higher risk group.
The HIV-positives, for example, were twice as likely to smoke but were less likely to have high blood pressure or diabetes.
The researchers speculated that HIV infection itself may raise heart attack risk.
Support for that last hypothesis was suggested in a study done by researchers at the University of Minnesota and several other academic medical centers.
In 100 randomly selected patients, they measured C-reactive protein (CRP), a bloodstream marker of inflammation known to increase a person's risk of heart attack.
Half the people had CRP levels in the high-risk range -- a much greater proportion than in the general population.
The results of heart disease studies in HIV patients, however, aren't entirely consistent.
Researchers from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Dupont Circle Physicians Group and Cerner Corp. in Vienna looked at what happened to patients treated at nine HIV clinics around the country from 1993 through 2000.
Among the 3,000 people taking protease inhibitors, there were 13 heart attacks, but there were only two among the 2,700 people not taking that class of drugs.
The blood vessel changes that lead to symptomatic heart disease or stroke often develop over decades, and HIV patients will probably have to be on antiretroviral drugs for a much longer time before a final answer about their risk is known.
It's also possible there may be risks associated with specific drugs that are not seen even in closely related compounds.
In the conference's final session, a researcher at Indiana University described an experiment in which six healthy, uninfected men took the protease inhibitor indinavir for four weeks and were subjected to a battery of tests.
The drug seemed to impair the ability of subjects' large arteries to produce nitric oxide, a substance that causes vessels to dilate in response to an organ's demand for greater blood flow.
One of the oldest sayings in baseball is, "We was robbed."
Well, we is being robbed right now.
And it's a dirty shame, because no one has the guts to do anything about it.
Quick, someone cover the kids' eyes.
There are things a kid shouldn't see, things a kid is too young to understand: Like adults standing idly by while ruthless profiteers cut the heart out of the Twin Cities.
The faceless heads of Major League Baseball plan to gather in a back alley in Chicago today and, like mob bosses always have done, decide whose truck to hijack.
In case you haven't figured it out, it's our big rig that is going to disappear.
The mob has taken out a contraction on us.
That's what they are calling this obscenity: a "contraction.
" There are too many teams and so baseball has to shrink.
I guess they want baseball to shrivel like the heart of a billionaire who, at a time in life when most people square up their accounts so they can meet their maker, just wants God to wait until he can pick up another quarter billion.
I'm so mad I can't even bear to say his name.
But if this deal goes down and he kills off the Minnesota Twins, his name will live on for years as a Minnesota Bogeyman, a name to scare little children with when they misbehave: Stop hitting your sister, Jason, or else [team owner]
Carl [Pohlad] may come and contract you in your sleep.
He's already contracting our memories: forty years Minnesota history, vaporized.
The Expos and the Twins are being put out of business in order to give clout to a baseball management that has been winless against the Major League Baseball Players Association in a quarter-century of negotiations.
All previous negotiations have been conducted with baseball having a Commissioner's Office, a National League office and an American League office.
The most disastrous of management's defeats took place in 1994-95, when the players went on strike.
Donald Fehr's union would not crack, even as the 1994 World Series was wiped out.
Since then, Bud Selig has gone from interim to full-time commissioner, and he has centralized the game's decision making.
The American and National League offices are gone.
The game is run from the Office of the Commissioner. . . .
"We are now a 28-team business, not 30 teams.
There are 50 major league jobs gone.
If you want us to expand the in-season rosters for the remaining teams to cover those 50 jobs, what are you going to give us?"
Obviously, the Expos are on life support.
This is a team that averaged less than 8,000 fans per game this season, with virtually no broadcast revenue and no prospects of a new ballpark that might revitalize the game in Montreal.
But the feeling you get, looking at the array of problems confronting baseball as the owners get together, is that the game itself is sick, despite the glitter of that World Series.
The question is whether these owners (and the players and agents who have nearly as much power as they do) have the will to heal the game -- or whether, two or three or five years from now, the owners will meet in another city to discuss further contraction.
Basics
After a week of intensifying U.S. airstrikes against Taliban positions north of Kabul, the opposition Northern Alliance is gearing up for a major offensive southward toward the capital, despite misgivings among some alliance leaders that their forces remain outnumbered and are not fully prepared to attack.
The air war, which this week included the use of B-52 bombers on this front for the first time, has crippled the ruling Taliban's small but lethal air force, destroyed its air defenses, wrecked its military bases and training camps, disrupted its communications system and decimated its stocks of heavy military equipment such as tanks, trucks and artillery pieces, according to Northern Alliance officials.
Yet, some alliance officials and military commanders concede, the balance of power still favors the Taliban, mainly because of its large advantage in manpower.
Before the U.S. air campaign began, the Taliban was estimated to field 40,000 to 45,000 fighters, as many as a quarter of them foreigners.
The Northern Alliance has roughly 15,000 regular troops, although thousands more could be mobilized for a major action.
As the United States shows signs of ramping up its air war, possibly including air cover for a ground offensive, indications abound here that the alliance is preparing for war.
In recent days, troops have been readying tanks and other equipment, test-firing mobile artillery pieces, mustering units in new uniforms and organizing military maneuvers and training exercises.
Leaders of the alliance, known here as the United Front, also have been discussing the offensive in detail.
Today, at a meeting of the alliance's leadership council, participants reviewed "how we will carry out the fighting, how we will use our police in the cities [that are captured] and how to minimize civilian casualties," said a leading member of the council, Wahidullah Sabawoon, who serves as the alliance's finance chief.
In an interview, Sabawoon added, "They [the Taliban] have lost their air support, and their artillery power is very weak right now.
But as for their manpower, we can't say anything.
It's still more than the United Front."
He expressed concern that the alliance was going ahead with an offensive without sufficient preparation. "
In these last five years, we've been living a defensive life, all the time under pressure," he said.
"We need time" to go on the attack, "because mentally and materially we're on the defensive.
We haven't reached that level to start an all-out attack against the Taliban."
Sabawoon lamented what he said was a lack of high-level diplomatic exchanges between the United States and the alliance.
"They [U.S. leaders] don't recognize us as an official and proper partner in this campaign," he said.
"We don't know about their future plans.
This makes us worry."
The alliance has not had enough time to conduct training, faces huge transportation problems, lacks sufficient income and is plagued by shortages, Sabawoon added.
Still, he argued that the offensive must go ahead, "because winter is coming, and the Taliban are preparing themselves to attack. . . .
We want to attack them before they attack us."
The coming battle will not be easy, he warned.
"We are ready for severe fighting, and we think terrorism is not an easy target.
The Americans also should be prepared for severe and heavy fighting."
In an interview in an abandoned village near the front lines at Bagram air base, Gen. Babajan, the commander of one section of the front north of Kabul, said the Taliban's heavy equipment and military bases have been destroyed.
But like other commanders, he said he is worried that the Taliban is still being reinforced with help from Pakistan's intelligence service, despite Pakistan's official support for the U.S.-led campaign.
Babajan charged that about 3,000 Islamic militants from Pakistan have crossed into Afghanistan and traveled to Kabul to aid the Taliban.
Of that number, he added, about 1,000 have reached the front lines north of the capital.
After a day of heavy bombardment by B-52s Friday, the front north of Kabul was relatively quiet today.
A few airstrikes by high-flying planes lit up the Taliban-held village of Estarghich with bright orange flashes in the morning, but the attacks tapered off by midday.
The village lies at the foot of mountains to the west of a main road to Kabul.
Also today, the Defense Department reported that an unmanned Predator drone was lost over Afghanistan on Friday.
It was the first Air Force drone lost in the war, but a CIA-operated drone went down near Kabul on Oct. 6, the day before the airstrikes began.
And the Associated Press reported that U.S. forces, hindered by bad weather in an initial failed rescue attempt Friday that left four rescuers injured, plucked a sick special operations serviceman from northern Afghanistan under the cover of darkness today, a Pentagon official said.
Speaking on condition of anonymity, the official said the second rescue mission went "without a hitch."
Another sign of intensified activity came today as Marine AV-8B Harrier jump jets were launched from the USS Peleliu in the Arabian Sea this morning on a mission to strike a command-and-control center in southern Afghanistan, the first time jets from the Marine expeditionary force have been used in the campaign.
In the north, the military campaign changed significantly in the past week with the arrival of the B-52 bombers.
A Pentagon official, speaking in Washington, said that until last week the strikes had been "piddling," with Navy jets dropping one or two bombs at a time.
Such small-scale strikes might eliminate antiaircraft sites or damage a headquarters, but would not inflict sufficient damage to punch a hole in Taliban lines and enable a Northern Alliance advance.
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said Tuesday that bombing of the front lines had been stepped up sharply, with "something like 80 percent" of the airstrikes directed against Taliban troops as the giant B-52s dropped dozens of bombs at a time.
Underscoring the changed tone of the U.S. effort, Pentagon officials also disclosed that they plan to deploy a JSTARS surveillance aircraft to the region.
JSTARS, which stands for Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System, is designed to track hundreds of enemy tanks and trucks on the battlefield and coordinate ground and air attacks on them.
Having it available to support Northern Alliance attacks is the strongest signal yet that the United States genuinely wants the rebels to advance against the Taliban.
Some officials said that the decision to deploy the JSTARS aircraft followed a Bush administration decision to uncouple the military campaign from political efforts to create an interim post-Taliban government for Afghanistan.
Rumsfeld strongly disputed that assertion, saying that the military campaign had never been constrained by political concerns.
The number of Taliban casualties from the latest bombing is unknown, but alliance officials said the casualties have not been particularly heavy.
More noticeable, they said, has been the absence from the skies of the Taliban's roughly 20 Russian-built MiG-21 and SU-22 fighter-bombers, or any helicopters or transport planes.
Alliance officials said they have received reports that planes not destroyed have been hidden and helicopters have been dismantled and dispersed.
According to Mir Rahman, Babajan's brother and a brigade commander in his area of the front, the Taliban has lost its advantage in air power, as U.S. bombers have repeatedly sought out its military planes at airports and other locations.
"The Taliban's past success on our front line was because they had airplanes and bombed our area," Rahman said.
"We are lucky that just now they don't have these things."
In the face of the U.S. bombing, Taliban fighters have been trying to find safety by moving as close as they can to the alliance's front lines, Rahman said.
These efforts frequently result in firefights as alliance soldiers try to force them back.
"They want to come closer when they hear the sound of airplanes," said Mohammad Naeb, a 31-year-old alliance fighter, as he leaned on a wall of sandbags at a rooftop observation post in a deserted, battle-scarred village about 400 yards from Taliban positions.
"When we see them, we fire at them, and they fire at us."
Naeb, a seasoned warrior who said he has been fighting in Afghanistan's wars for more than half his life, often overhears enemy radio transmissions in Arabic or Urdu.
"They're scared of the airstrikes," he said of the Taliban generally.
"Sometimes we hear them shouting to take cover.
We're very happy about the airstrikes, because their morale is going down."
Khansaid Khattar, 34, the commander of the post and a 19-year veteran of the Afghan wars, said he hoped the U.S. airstrikes would be "intensified at the time we attack.
" Sitting in a chair and smoking a cigarette on the rooftop in full view of Taliban positions, he expressed confidence that the bombing would allow the alliance to capture Taliban territory.
Others, however, are not so sure. "
In Afghanistan, the weapons of war are the Kalashnikov, the grenade launcher and the 82mm mortar," an official in the alliance government said, referring to the AK-47 assault rifle and other portable weapons.
"These are still with the Taliban, and they will make use of them.
I think there will be heavy fighting, and they will defend their lines.
"
The military balance still favors the Taliban, he said, "because they are receiving lots of new arms and ammunition and soldiers from Pakistan, and they have prepared themselves against the Americans."
Meanwhile, a French journalist arrested last month in Afghanistan was released today and handed over to French diplomats on the Pakistani border.
Staff writer Thomas E. Ricks in Washington contributed to this report. 
Related Links
They came to power five years ago as a highly disciplined movement aimed at cleansing Afghan society.
They opposed corruption and factional infighting.
They vowed to impose security, strict morals and a harsh version of Islamic law.
But when the Taliban militiamen left Kabul in the cover of darkness late Monday, their departure was marked by confusion, panic, looting and vandalism.
Taliban troops ransacked offices and stole vehicles.
They marauded through currency exchange shops, smashing open vaults and stealing cash.
They looted the museum.
In at least one military facility, they left behind for the city's new conquerors debris-strewn offices with broken doors and locks.
"They destroyed all of the facilities here," said Gen. Mohammed Sharif Tawasuli, commander of the Prophet Muhammad Division of the opposition Northern Alliance, whose troops moved into the city early Tuesday and took up position at the site of an old military school.
"They took whatever they could.
Then they broke all the locks."
Tawasuli and other Northern Alliance commanders also said the Taliban left behind a trove of documents, including passports, identification cards and training manuals, detailing the involvement of Pakistanis, Arabs, Chechens and other foreign fighters in helping to maintain Taliban rule.
They said the documents, written in Persian, Urdu and English, confirmed what Northern Alliance officials have long reported: that thousands of foreign troops were integrated into the Taliban force and may have formed the core of its frontline defense.
As Kabul residents began today to fully absorb the reality of the Taliban's sudden exit -- with men shaving their once-mandatory beards and women showing their uncovered faces in public for the first time in five years -- new details emerged of those final, panicked hours before the Taliban's pre-dawn retreat.
In the currency exchange district, inside the main marketplace, Taliban troops raided about 80 shops, dealers said.
They smashed the locks on metal grates, broke open safes and stole an estimated $1.5 million, 10 million Pakistani rupees and "tons of afghanis," currency dealer Fazil Ahmed said, basing his estimate on a stocktaking session with his colleagues.
"We have some special safes, but they used their weapons to break the locks," said Ahmed, whose shop was looted of $4,500 in U.S. currency and 188 million afghanis.
"It's not only me -- it's everybody."
An official with a foreign relief agency said several aid groups reported that Taliban troops and officials, in the days before their exit, had entered the groups' compounds and confiscated vehicles.
He said the Taliban often used such rationales as faulty paperwork as a pretext for commandeering the cars.
Northern Alliance soldiers posted outside the Kabul city museum reported that some antiques had been looted before the Taliban's departure.
The museum had only recently been repaired, with foreign assistance.
Not all of the Taliban's forces got the message to evacuate.
At Kabul's 2nd District police station, Gen. Abdul Wahid Sharifi produced for a reporter two Afghan Taliban soldiers who he said were captured the night before hiding in a residential neighborhood with AK-47 assault rifles and pretending to be Northern Alliance troops.
He said the two, from Afghanistan's southern border area near Pakistan, "didn't know there was an order to evacuate."
He said police arrested a dozen Taliban stragglers Tuesday night, all armed, including one Pakistani, and that several carried military-style manuals printed in Pakistan and written in Urdu, Pakistan's dominant language.
During more than five weeks of punishing U.S. airstrikes, the Taliban went to great lengths to try to conceal assets.
In the Qowa-a-Markaz neighborhood, residents described how the Taliban moved dozens of vehicles into the yard of a private repair shop, hoping the vehicles would be missed by U.S. planes.
"They put their vehicles here," said Abdul Qodus, a security guard for the automobile lot.
"This is a private place, so they thought their cars would be secure."
One witness described how in their final hours in the capital, Taliban troops used rocket-propelled grenades to destroy cars that were under repair or for some reason could not be moved.
After the Taliban evacuated the city, some residents began looting in the early morning hours Tuesday.
Some witnesses described seeing women, children and old people stealing food from warehouses and shops.
Northern Alliance officials have cited the breakdown of security, and the threat of chaos, as the reason they broke a vow not to occupy the capital.
Troops have moved into government ministry buildings, military installations, foreign embassy compounds and other key sites.
Heavily armed troops in camouflage as well as policemen in black uniforms seemed to be jointly taking responsibility for Kabul's security today.
Soldiers at major intersections searched cars, while police officers directed traffic from elevated pedestals at traffic circles.
Kabul residents have endured successive civil wars, including the Taliban's relentless barrage in April 1996, when 866 rockets were fired into the city.
So while generally glad to see the Taliban gone, many here seemed anxious at the sight of a new Afghan army in the capital -- particularly troops from the Northern Alliance, the disparate group whose rule here from 1992 to 1996 was marred by infighting.
"I don't know whether the alliance will be good people or not," said Haji Ismatullah, a money-changer whose shop was looted by departing Taliban troops.
"We've already experienced them."
"If there is support from the international community, we might have peace," he added.
"But if there is no international support, we don't think they can bring peace."
The alliance today made some moves to try to assuage the nervous populace.
It announced that people who had lost their jobs under the Taliban would be rehired and should return to their offices on Saturday.
"I'm looking forward to Saturday," said Saraj Uddin, 28, a flight engineer who said he was fired by the Taliban because he once worked for "a Communist regime.
"
Uddin was lined up with scores of other men for something he had been waiting for for more than five years: a shave at the barber shop.
The Taliban mandated that all men grow beards, and today, as an act of defiance, men stood in long lines for the chance to be freshly shaved.
Abdullah, 17, pointed to the pile of hair on the floor.
"We will send it to Pakistan!"
he said to laughter in the shop.
Many Kabul residents blame Pakistan for having supported the Taliban during its five-year rule.
Some of Kabul's women, forced by the Taliban to wear the traditional long, flowing burqa , were also enjoying a new taste of freedom.
In the Tahir Maskan neighborhood, a gritty area of public housing high-rises, a group of eight women stood talking and laughing with their faces fully exposed to the sunshine for the first time in five years.
"You can experience it yourself," said Karima Herat, who was headmistress of a girls' high school that was shut down by the Taliban.
"Wear it yourself just for one hour, then remove it, and you will understand.
"
"We're very happy," said her friend, Rayhna Sadat, who taught school before the Taliban banned women from the workplace.
"But we're worried about whether this government is sustainable or whether there will be looting.
This is the second day, so we feel a bit free.
But we cannot say anything about the future.
We are afraid of civil war in our country."
Referring to the Northern Alliance, she said, "It is not good to experience the ones we've already experienced before."
Northern Alliance officials and commanders say they are aware of the misgivings and suspicions, but said they have learned from their mistakes. "
The Taliban was promoted because of the fault of the Northern Alliance," said Tawasuli, the general, who was sitting in his new office, a partially destroyed room in the military school.
"When they [the parties of the Northern Alliance] captured Kabul in 1992, they started a lot of factional fighting.
People blamed the government because they could not provide food or security.
So they turned to the Taliban.
The Taliban promised security and to bring Islam to Afghanistan.
"We've learned," he said.
"We know that fighting is not the solution for our country."
The U.S. Postal Service plans to use a highly sophisticated technology -- polymerase chain reaction (PCR) -- to detect anthrax spores and other biohazards in the mail virtually as it is being sorted, postal officials announced yesterday.
The PCR technology is still being tested for adaptation to high-speed postal sorters, but by the end of September, USPS plans to sign a $200 million contract to install the PCR systems at 292 facilities around the country, Chief Engineer Tom Day said.
The discovery that PCR, sometimes called "molecular photocopying," can be used in automated fashion to help detect biohazards without waiting 24 hours for a lab analysis has enabled the Postal Service to cut its projected costs to fight bioterror attacks.
Last November, Postmaster General John E. Potter asked Congress for $5 billion, about half of which was to be spent on irradiation technology to kill bacteria such as anthrax spores in the mail.
"Give credit to American technology and industry," Day said.
"They've come up with a good approach for us in PCR."
Congress last December set aside $500 million to help the Postal Service -- walloped by steep drops in revenue and mail volume -- safeguard its customers, employees and the mail itself against bioterrorism.
Congress asked USPS for a report on how it will spend the money.
The Postal Service plans to spend $245 million to retrofit its high-speed sorters, adding a system that will vacuum up air near the mail and feed it through a filter to capture any harmful bacteria, Day said.
About $35 million will be used to decontaminate and reopen two major sorting and distribution facilities -- Brentwood in Washington and Hamilton Township in Trenton, N.J. -- that were shut down last fall following the discovery of anthrax-contaminated mail.
Day called it the agency's "number one priority."
He did not know when the facilities would reopen, but said he hopes it will be in the next two months.
The agency is working with two firms that have developed PCR prototypes for post offices.
They operate slightly differently, but both capture air samples sucked from mail and test the samples for biohazards.
Bacteria such as anthrax spores have specific DNA signatures.
PCR is a general term for a process that uses specific enzymes to amplify tiny quantities of DNA and make a DNA match.
The air samples would be taken in half-hour intervals and tested.
If a biohazard is detected, the facility would be shut down, employees medicated and the facility cleaned.
"We're not making the claim that those employees are protected to the point they don't need medication," Day said.
Rather, the intent is rapid detection and action.
Day would not disclose the names of the firms.
One has a contract to help the military detect anthrax spores.
The other has adapted the technology for doctors to conduct lab testing in their offices.
The systems will be able to detect eight biohazards, including anthrax spores.
Day said the Pentagon will not allow the others to be named.
will also spend $10.5 million to repair the Church Street Post Office in Manhattan, damaged in the World Trade Center attack, and $500,000 to complete the plan to protect against bioterror attacks.
The Postal Service earlier bought eight "e-beam" machines for $40 million to irradiate and kill bacteria on mail.
Four machines will be placed in a facility in the District, whose location will be disclosed through the process of seeking a permit for the devices, Day said.
The other four will be placed in another site to be announced.
Fabricius de Vreede cringed as he drove his black taxicab through one of this port town's toughest neighborhoods, past the knot of young black men standing on the street corner -- "dealing drugs," he confidently explained -- and past two teenagers of North African descent who appeared to be rolling a joint on a small bridge over a canal.
He rarely does this drive at night, into many of what the Dutch call Rotterdam's "no-go areas.
" When he does, he carries a heavy club, always within reach. "
At night, you can't walk in Rotterdam anymore," said de Vreede, who is only 21 but speaks with an aged weariness.
"The central station area is scary.
Even I'm scared."
Like many Dutch people, he never says who he feels is responsible.
But the political maverick Pim Fortuyn broke these taboos, openly pointing a finger at the country's large immigrant community.
His assassination earlier this month helped make immigration the prime issue in today's national elections.
Some projections show his party, with its platform of limiting new immigration, finishing second.
Immigrants and their descendants now make up about 10 percent of the population of the Netherlands, and more than a third in the country's biggest cities, Amsterdam, Rotterdam and The Hague.
In a country with an aging population, low birth rate and a need to fill jobs, immigration has long been an important component of the economy.
From an early wave of low-paid Moroccan immigrants in the 1960s and '70s to fill manual labor jobs, to the more recent influx from Turkey and the Balkans, the Netherlands has traditionally absorbed outsiders with little public debate.
De Vreede is himself an example of this historical welcome: his father is Dutch and his mother came from Brazil.
At first glance, Rotterdam seems to be a model of successful multiculturalism.
On the road outside the central train station, the Afro-Asian supermarket is near Hong Kong Travel.
A-Pien's shop serves Surinamese-Chinese cuisine; barber shops specialize in African and Asian hair styles.
But at night, this and other immigrant neighborhoods take on a feel that is sinister to many whites. "
The no-go areas that Pim Fortuyn was talking about really exist -- people don't go out of their houses at night," said Otto Groeneveld, 48, a landscaper.
"For older people, girls, women, you can't walk there even in the daytime.
They have guns.
They take your mobile phone, your jewelry."
He added, "The gap between the politicians and the citizens is too big.
They don't come to these no-go areas.
They never come and ask people what's wrong.
Most of the politicians live outside Rotterdam in nice houses.
They don't see all the Moroccans around."
People see problems in newcomers from Eastern Europe as well.
Some immigrants who fled the ethnic wars in the Balkans in the 1990s are involved in manufacturing chemical drugs like ecstasy, and trafficking in weapons and prostitutes, authorities said.
For their part, immigrants often say they are being singled out unfairly, and that Fortuyn succeeded mainly in pitting ethnic communities against each other.
Since his death, many immigrants said, white Dutch citizens have lost their reticence to express views that would have been considered unacceptable before.
"If I have a colleague who doesn't like me, now I know it," said Fatiha Yousfi, 27, a Dutch-born woman of Moroccan descent who works at an export-import company in Amsterdam.
"Before, if they were racist, they didn't want to talk about it."
In interviews, young Dutch Moroccan men said they are all now viewed as potential criminals.
Khalid Mahdaoui, 23, was born here, and said that while he feels Dutch, "the Dutch people treat me differently.
" When he enters a crowded streetcar, "the driver goes on the microphone and warns people to be aware of pickpockets," he said.
He recalled learning when he was younger to keep his hands high on a tram's overhead bar, so people would not suspect him of reaching for their wallets.
Popular dance clubs are generally off-limits to people like him, he said.
"If I go to a disco, they won't let me in," he said.
"But if I dye my hair blond, and my eyebrows blond, I can get in."
Mahdaoui and his friend, Redouan Salmoun, 21, said they know some young Moroccans who have been involved in street crime, but they said it's a tiny number.
Despite a widespread perception that crime is snowballing, government statistics show that overall it remained fairly steady from the mid-1990s until 2000, the last year for which firm statistics are available.
Only a few categories, such as vandalism, increased in that period.
Nationally, there is no breakdown of criminals by ethnic origin.
But some cities keep their own statistics.
Rotterdam, for example, reported that 49 percent of crimes and the vast majority of street crimes are committed by Moroccan immigrant youths.
Some analysts said those figures can be misleading. "
In Rotterdam, 60 or 70 percent of the youngsters are immigrants, so it's not very surprising that 60 or 70 percent of the crimes are done by them," said Ila Kasim, 34, a businessman and member of Citizenship and Islam, a government advisory panel.
Also, experts said, crime statistics do not include offenses such as hooliganism at soccer games, an almost exclusively white phenomenon.
Ahmed Aboutaleb, a Moroccan immigrant who runs the Institute for Multicultural Development, a government-funded research group on cross-cultural issues, suggested that when young immigrants turn to crime it's partly because of Dutch society. "
These kids were born here," he said.
"Where did they learn how to be a thief? . . .
These kids face exactly the same kinds of problems we know faced Dutch kids -- single-income parents, divorced parents, parents of bad socioeconomic condition."
But aspects of the immigrant experience can add more pressure, according to Aboutaleb and other experts.
Traditional roles in which fathers are strong authority figures are reversed here, for instance.
When the fathers speak little or no Dutch, the children help them navigate government bureaucracies and survive everyday life.
As a result, the experts said, fathers' roles as authority figures in the home are often lost.
Immigrants face pervasive discrimination in employment, apartment rentals and other aspects of everyday life, said Frank Bovenkerk, a criminologist at the University of Utrecht.
Although most Dutch, in opinion polls or samples, will not say they are racist, "in their actual behavior, it is racial discrimination that they practice," he said.
Often immigrants end up isolated from mainstream Dutch society.
Rachida Azough, 27, a second-generation Dutch-Moroccan and a journalist with the left-of-center newspaper de Volkskrant, recalls growing up in a neighborhood that was "getting blacker and blacker."
She watched as white people moved out, creating what was an almost all-Moroccan environment in which Dutch was not spoken on the street and most people never learned the language well.
Unemployment was high and schools were neglected.
"It's only logical that a neighborhood consisting of only the lower socioeconomic classes, with an immigrant history, with problems in their own families, will have more problems," she said.
The Dutch way, she said, is "put them all together, then leave them behind."
Foreigners "don't integrate the way the Dutch would like them to integrate," said Bovenkerk.
"They define their own situation here as temporary, even though they are never going 'home.'
Therefore they feel it is not urgent to integrate.
What it produces is this halfway generation."
The Federal Aviation Administration on Friday ordered airlines to immediately inspect the tail assemblies of their Airbus A300-600 and A310 planes.
The tail of an Airbus A300-600 sheared off before an American Airlines plane crashed in New York Monday.
American and two cargo carriers, FedEx and United Parcel Service, fly the French-made jets.
About 135 planes are covered by the order.
The tails on both Airbus models are made of composite materials nonmetal, graphite-like substances that are lighter than aluminum.
Federal safety investigators are looking at the tail of American Flight 587 as they try to figure out the cause of Monday's crash, which killed 265 people.
"Although neither the FAA nor the NTSB (National Transportation Safety Board) have reached conclusions with respect to these possible failures on the accident airplane, we consider it prudent to require an inspection of these structures to identify any such indication that may exist," the FAA said in its directive.
French aviation authorities issued similar orders, the FAA said.
The FAA said all inspections must be carried out within 15 days and focus on the vertical stabilizer and the hinges that attach the rudder to the tail and that attach the tail to the body of the aircraft.
If the inspections find cracks or other problems that need to be repaired, the airlines must get FAA approval for the work.
All results from the inspections must be submitted to the FAA.
Airlines that had inspected those areas within six months do not have to recheck the planes, but must submit the results to the FAA.
The FAA plans to use the data from the inspections to see whether any additional inspections or safety regulations are needed, spokesman Les Dorr said.
Coming so soon after terrorists hijacked four airplanes Sept. 11, the crash of American Flight 587 initially raised fears that it was the victim of another attack.
Though NTSB officials quickly said there was no evidence of terrorism or sabotage, the FAA's action indicates that investigators believe the crash was due to mechanical problems, said Mary Schiavo, former inspector general of the Transportation Department.
"If they don't go out and inspect the planes, it leads one to suspect that they really believe it's something not mechanical or structural," said Schiavo, now a lawyer representing victims of airplane crashes.
"If that's what they think happened, why aren't they out there trying to prevent future ones?"
Sudden Taliban Losses Spur Scramble by U.S., U.N. The abrupt collapse of Taliban forces north and west of the Afghan capital of Kabul added urgency yesterday to efforts by the United States and the United Nations to arrange an interim government in Afghanistan able to prevent it from plummeting into chaos.
With U.S. officials pressing the opposition Northern Alliance to refrain from marching on Kabul, senior American diplomats met with their counterparts from the Afghanistan region at the United Nations to map out an accelerated strategy for filling a potential power vacuum.
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell counseled "speed, speed, speed," in urging the foreign ministers of Russia, China, Pakistan, Iran and three Central Asian republics to help plan for the possible deployment of peacekeeping forces in the capital city.
"A week ago, people were complaining that things were moving too slowly," a State Department official said.
"Now it's moving really fast.
Everyone is seized with the urgency of the situation."
After fretting that the Afghan opposition was too timid in taking on the Taliban militia, U.S. officials are now coping with a turnaround that has seen the Northern Alliance capture the city of Mazar-e Sharif, advance on Herat and move to the outskirts of Kabul.
American officials said they have won repeated assurances from the Northern Alliance that it would not enter the capital, which could provoke resistance from the Pashtun community that dominates southern Afghanistan and cement support for the Taliban.
But the sudden prospect of a power vacuum should Taliban rule in the city collapse has left American and United Nations officials scrambling to arrange an interim administration that can govern while a broad opposition government is formed.
"As things are moving very fast, we need to bring the political aspects in line with the military developments on the ground," said U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan.
American officials said they are concerned that the longer a political void remains in Kabul, the more likely a militia within the Northern Alliance might make a play for domination in the city. "
Frankly, even if I had an agreement with the Northern Alliance, I wouldn't be 100 percent sure the people I spoke with to get an agreement would be able to control everyone," a State Department official said.
The Northern Alliance is a loose coalition of rebels comprised primarily of ethnic Uzbeks, Tajiks and Hezaras, and has long been at odds with the Pashtuns, the largest ethnic group in Afghanistan.
Bush administration officials said they are chastened by the experience nine years ago when internecine fighting among opposition groups smashed hopes for a peaceful transition of power in Kabul after the fall of the Soviet-backed government.
The volatile situation in Kabul was underscored yesterday by Haron Amin, Washington spokesman for the Northern Alliance, who said his fighters may feel compelled to march on the city.
He warned that Pakistan, a longtime adversary of the Northern Alliance, may be preparing its own insurrection to take control of Kabul.
Amin also said the Northern Alliance would enter Kabul to protect civilians who come under attack from the Taliban.
Administration officials said, however, that the Northern Alliance has good reason to abide by the American appeal for restraint since U.S. airpower has been critical to the rebels' progress on the battlefield and international funding will be essential in Afghanistan's reconstruction. "
They have to see there's not much future if they alienate us," a State Department official said.
U.S. officials also said they remain optimistic that neighboring countries such as Pakistan and Iran, which fueled the outbreak of factional fighting in 1992, were not united on the need to create a stable, broad-based government.
Pakistan, which has a sizable Pashtun minority, is advocating a leading role for Pashtuns in any Afghan government.
Iran is closely allied with Afghanistan's ethnic Hezaras, who are fellow Shiites.
"The key here is the willingness of outside powers not only to not foment that kind of action but to induce cooperation," another State Department official said.
"There's a much better chance now than in previous times.
People do learn from their mistakes."
Special U.N. envoy Lakhdar Brahimi, who has been discussing the country's future with its neighbors, said he planned to assemble representatives of different Afghan factions and ethnic groups within days to confer on an interim administration for Kabul and perhaps other cities.
A U.N. official said Brahimi would try to conclude a deal at the meeting, proposed for either Europe or a neutral country closer to Afghanistan.
U.S. officials said this local administration would likely have U.N. support for basic city services but be essentially an Afghan operation.
Scores of U.N. civil administrators were evacuated from Afghanistan two months ago.
The United Nations or members of the U.S.-led war coalition might also provide troops to police the city if an inter-Afghan force cannot be arranged.
"It may be useful to have some kind of interim political arrangement from the United Nations," a senior State Department official said.
"If the Taliban pulls out of Kabul it may be necessary to have some kind of security arrangement for Kabul -- perhaps a coalition of the willing."
American officials also held talks yesterday with diplomats from Turkey, a Muslim country and NATO member that has been anxious to play a role in a U.N.-backed peacekeeping force.
No decisions were made during what a senior U.S. official called the "open-ended discussions." 
Turkey, which has already contributed 90 special forces troops to the war, said it was prepared to dispatch peacekeepers but wanted the operation first to win U.N. Security Council approval.
Bangladesh and Indonesia, two other Muslim countries, were also named by U.S. officials as possible contributors to an international force.
Meanwhile, recently appointed U.S. envoy James F. Dobbins headed from the United Nations to Europe on the first leg of a trip designed to help cobble together a broad political front opposed to Taliban rule.
He was scheduled to stop first in Rome and speak to exiled Afghan King Mohammed Zahir Shah, envisioned by the United States as the titular head of a new interim government.
The State Department has approved $400,000 to cover administrative and travel costs for the king's effort.
Officials associated with Zahir Shah met U.S. diplomats in Rome yesterday to set the agenda for Dobbins's visit and compare expectations about U.S. assistance, according to a representative of the king.
Afghans around the former king were disappointed by the limited U.S. support before the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
For their part, American officials have been increasingly exasperated by sputtering efforts of the king's representatives and the Northern Alliance to lay the groundwork for a new national council. 
The administration has also been frustrated with the reluctance of Pashtun leaders to turn against the Taliban, which is predominantly Pashtun.
U.S. officials said the rapid advances of the Northern Alliance may embolden disgruntled Pashtuns to open a southern front and sign on to an opposition front.
"Our hopes are that events are showing people in the south that the Taliban is the losing side and it's time to change sides," a State Department official said.
But that strategy could be undermined if Northern Alliance fighters take revenge on Pashtuns in Kabul or Mazar-e Sharif.
That is why U.S. and Turkish officials made clear to Northern Alliance Gen. Abdurrashid Dostum, an Uzbek commander with a record of brutality, that he must ensure his troops do not commit atrocities in Mazar-e Sharif, according to U.S. sources.
Lynch reported from the United Nations.
Staff writer Marc Kaufman contributed to this report.
MOSCOW, Nov. 3 ?
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld arrived here today for talks with senior Russian officials on missile defense, nuclear force reductions and the war on terrorism, calling Russian President Vladimir Putin a "stalwart" in that global conflict.
Rumsfeld said it remains to be seen how Putin's new cooperative relationship with Washington will affect strategic negotiations on missile defense and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty.
But Rumsfeld, in remarks to reporters on his plane en route to Moscow, said Putin's immediate offer of assistance after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on New York and Washington established him as a leader willing to work "with the West and the rest of the world to help deal with this terrible problem.
" Rumsfeld's trip comes largely in anticipation of President Bush's summit meeting with Putin in the United States 10 days from now.
U.S. and Russian officials say they are hopeful that the two leaders can announce a new strategic "understanding" that would allow the Pentagon to pursue extensive missile defense testing without scrapping the ABM accord.
But with two former Soviet republics bordering Afghanistan, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan, now providing assistance to U.S. military forces bombing Afghanistan's ruling Taliban militia, Rumsfeld expanded his trip to build relationships with allies in the war.
He is scheduled to travel to both former Soviet republics later today.
Tomorrow, he heads to Pakistan, another key ally bordering Afghanistan, and then on to India.
He is scheduled to return to Washington late Monday night.
Regarding the ABM Treaty, Rumsfeld said his announcement last week that the Pentagon had postponed several missile defense radar tests that might have violated the accord was designed to show that the treaty has indeed become an impediment to the administration's ambitious missile defense agenda.
While the Russians took Rumsfeld's announcement as a conciliatory nod to their ongoing support for the treaty, Rumsfeld said it was not intended as a sign that he has softened his stance on withdrawal from the accord.
"I'm not suggesting we delay withdrawal from the treaty," Rumsfeld said.
"All I have said publicly on the subject is what the president has said: We need to set the treaty aside and establish a new relationship between the United States and Russia. . . .
The president has said we will deploy missile defense.
That can't be done with a treaty there that's an impediment."
Rumsfeld declined comment on the new strategic understanding now under discussion under which both nations would also agree to reduce the number of strategic warheads to between 1,750 and 2,250 each.
"There are all kinds of things that have been discussed at different levels by different people," Rumsfeld said.
"How it will end up, we won't know until the two presidents get together in Washington."
Related Links
Some realities began to hit the Baltimore Ravens today, only hours after they beat the Titans in a wild finish on "Monday Night Football."
Tailback Terry Allen broke his left hand after one carry and will miss four to six weeks.
If the team believes Allen will return in time for the playoffs, he will not be placed on the season-ending injured reserve list.
Allen's injury is another blow to the running back position, which lost Jamal Lewis early in training camp to a knee injury.
Allen was signed off the street almost immediately to replace Lewis, and he led the team in rushing before an ankle sprain caused him to miss the two games before the Monday night thriller.
Inexperienced Jason Brookins has been effective running inside.
His 25-yard run late in the fourth quarter was the highlight of a drive that ended when Matt Stover kicked a 30-yard field goal for a 16-10 lead and forced the Titans to score a touchdown with their last possession.
But neither Brookins nor Obafemi Ayanbadejo, used mostly in passing situations, has been close to consistent as a blocker.
And quarterback Elvis Grbac again was rushed heavily in a spotty performance (15 of 27, 192 yards) against the Titans after missing two games with bruised ribs. 
"He missed a couple of things that could have impacted the game," Coach Brian Billick said of Grbac, who has seven touchdown passes and nine interceptions for the season.
"There's a number of [passes] that he'll look at and say [he] didn't read this thing out right.
All in all, I was pleased."
Billick said special-teamer Moe Williams would get more work at tailback and that there was "probably not" a free agent that could help.
The playoff chances for Baltimore increased while those of the Titans diminished after a Monday night memorable for unusual plays and that bizarre finish.
"It's the craziest thing I've ever seen," Baltimore defensive tackle Tony Siragusa said.
Siragusa was part of the oddities, with two sacks in the first half after not recording one since 1999.
Also, each team had a botched center snap on a kick.
Tennessee's cost it a field goal near the end of the first half.
Baltimore's led to a Titans field goal, too.
Punter Kyle Richarson could have fielded the high snap, but compounded that error by throwing a pass from the end zone to Anthony Mitchell instead of taking a safety.
Ravens wide receiver Qadry Ismail fumbled and had a personal foul that backed the Ravens out of field goal range.
But he later turned a short pass into a 57-yard touchdown late in the third quarter. 
All this was prelude to the final seconds -- and the play that came after time had expired because Ravens linebacker Peter Boulware was called for a penalty that ended up helping his team.
The ending came after the Titans drove 77 yards to inside the Baltimore 1 in the final two minutes.
Titans quarterback Steve McNair completed a pass to wide receiver Kevin Dyson, who was tackled just short of the end zone by cornerback Duane Starks and outside linebacker Jamie Sharper.
Dyson had come within inches of the end zone before -- on the last play of Tennessee's 23-16 loss to the St. Louis Rams in Super Bowl XXXIV.
Dyson made the catch with about seven seconds left.
The ball was hastily spotted as time ticked away and, before the snap to McNair, Boulware leaped over the line of scrimmage toward the Baltimore defense, brushing a couple of Tennessee linemen.
This should have stopped the action because Boulware made contact with the Titans.
But McNair immediately bulled into the end zone and an official gave the touchdown signal.
After more than five minutes, however, the officials sorted everything out and made the correct ruling. 
Had Boulware managed to leap across the line of scrimmage without touching a Titan, McNair's touchdown would have been allowed.
That is unless one of the officials had noticed that the Titans had lined up in an illegal formation.
But an illegal formation is not a foul until the ball is snapped -- and Boulware's contact came before the snap.
The officials called the penalty on Boulware and moved the ball half the distance to the goal line.
That was a matter of inches -- and McNair tried another sneak with everyone properly aligned.
Defensive tackle Sam Adams and Siragusa stuffed the line, while safety Corey Harris and Sharper put McNair on the ground as he tried to bounce outside.
"Corey nearly knocked himself out," Sharper said.
"We went from very low to very ecstatic."
Ravens Note:
Television cameras caught Adams taking a punch at center Mike Flynn in pregame warmups.
Adams played down the incident, saying: "Tempers flare.
But I wouldn't have this [Super Bowl] ring without him."
The federal government will act immediately to take over control of airport baggage screening.
Within a year all screening will be under federal supervision and done by federal, U.S.-citizen employees.
For three years all commercial airports will be under the federal system except for five airports, of five different sizes, that volunteer for a pilot program to test different screening approaches.
After the three-year period airports that meet strict federal standards will have the option to move to a different system using local law enforcement officials or private security firms.
The Transportation Department may deploy law enforcement to bolster airport perimeter and access security.
Airports have 60 days to take the action necessary to expand inspections of checked bags.
Full explosive detection systems should be in place by the end of 2002.
Airports will be required to maximize the use of equipment to detect and neutralize biological and chemical weapons.
A new agency is to be created in the Transportation Department to have jurisdiction over transportation security.
The Transportation Department will develop a database to allow the cross-checking of names on watch lists of federal law enforcement agencies.
Airlines will be allowed to implement trusted passenger programs to expedite screening on a voluntary basis.
Air carriers must use the Air Passenger Information System to provide Customs with crew and passenger manifests and related information for each flight.
Intelligence reports on terrorism must be shared with the Transportation Department.
Flight deck doors must be strengthened and remain locked while aircraft are in flight.
Video cameras may be provided to alert pilots to cabin activity.
Access to the flight deck is prohibited to those not in the flight crew.
The number of Federal air marshals is to be increased, and they must be placed on every "high-risk" flight.
The Transportation Department must develop guidance for flight crew anti-hijacking training.
A switch must be located in the cabin for flight attendants to notify pilots of hijacking.
The Transportation Department is allowed to authorize use of weapons in cockpits.
A $2.50 passenger fee for each emplanement, with a maximum of $5.00 for one trip.
Provides limited liability for the owners of the World Trade Center buildings and others harmed by the Sept. 11 attacks.
Franco Caviglia, a tall, dashing congressman, was recently enjoying an espresso at the Casablanca cafe near Argentina's neoclassical Congress building when a group of people advanced on his table.
They berated him with insults and shoves, leading Caviglia to attempt a fast exit.
But the mob of normally level-headed diners barred the door, holding him captive for a half-hour before he was rescued by police.
His crime: being a politician in Argentina.
In a nation suffering financial collapse, it is open season on politicians of every stripe.
Impoverished and furious, Argentines are blaming their leaders for their woes, sparking a wave of attacks against elected and appointed political figures and igniting calls for an overhaul of a two-decade-old democratic system that citizens say has grown bloated, corrupt and unresponsive.
Although deepest here, the sentiments in Argentina highlight a rise of resentment against democratically elected leaders across Latin America.
Following the fall of dictatorships in every nation in the region except Cuba, countries as diverse as Argentina, Peru, Paraguay and Venezuela have embraced democratic governments, only to find they often are accompanied by corruption and economic stagnation.
Even leaders who recently rose to power from outside the region's widely despised political class, such as Venezuela's Hugo Chavez and Peru's Alejandro Toledo, confront widespread discontent over their inability to deliver swiftly on promises of change.
"This is not a rejection of democracy.
Rather, you're seeing frustrated citizens demanding better representation, transparency and a higher quality of leadership," said Horacio Verbitsky, a political commentator in Buenos Aires.
"Democracy is supposed to mean that the people have a voice, and now, the people are using it to tell politicians that they need to do a better job."
In Argentina, where popular uprisings have led to the fall of two presidents since late December, those frustrations continue to boil over into violence.
Last week, Sen. Eduardo Menem, brother of a former Argentine president, Carlos Menem, got into a brawl on an airplane after other passengers shouted insults at him.
Five weeks ago, an angry mob attacked and burned down the home of a congresswoman in the province of Buenos Aires.
A former government minister was recently spit on and harassed by a crowd of 500 in a shopping mall; afterward, he shaved his beard to disguise himself.
Supreme Court judges have had their homes egged and vandalized.
The nine justices are now under special protection from Argentina's intelligence service.
The attacks could represent a threat to the new administration of President Eduardo Duhalde.
Politicians argue that the increasingly violent nature of these confrontations, along with almost daily protests, is fostering what some call a "lynching mentality" eroding the rule of law.
It is also, officials say, robbing the new government of the support it needs to halt the nation's economic plunge.
"I understand their rage.
The people feel as if we have failed them, and maybe they are right," said Caviglia, 40. "
But if we're going to get out of this crisis, we need to restore faith in our institutions, not tear them down."
But citizens respond that the time has come to hold their leaders accountable for their failures and excesses, which many here say bear a large part of the blame for Argentina's painful economic collapse.
Government waste and legislative perks remain a sore point.
In the past decade, public spending on salaries, including those for scores of new political appointees, has soared 147 percent, to $9 billion a year.
Although almost half of Argentines live on less than $2 a day, legislators make as much as $5,400 a month, enjoy $3,000 monthly travel budgets, receive gasoline and car insurance allotments of $1,200 a month, and have additional budgets for as many as seven staff members.
A Senate investigating committee recently found the government spent $1.5 million last year to maintain the Senate's fleet of 50 cars, more than enough to buy 50 new ones.
Former officials have been accused of bilking the national health care system for the aged for an estimated $1 billion, and dozens of legislators have been accused of taking bribes from the failed administration of President Fernando de la Rua to approve a controversial labor reform law last year.
And although several politicians, judges and government ministers have been charged with corruption, they rarely face punishment.
A case in point was the arrest of former president Menem last year.
He was briefly jailed on arms trafficking charges but was quickly ordered released by the Supreme Court, which is headed by one of his former law partners.
Additionally, an electoral system in which people vote largely for parties rather than individual legislators has kept power concentrated in two traditional political machines, the nationalistic Peronist party and center-left Radical Civic Union, thus encouraging deals struck between powerful politicians rather than open discussion.
The situation has fed public frustration, giving rise not only to the spontaneous attacks against politicians on the streets, but also to organized protests by newly formed citizens groups in front of politicians' homes, here and around the country.
"If you ask why Argentines are harassing politicians, the answer is because in this country, it is the only way to make them pay for their arrogance," said Sergio Tobal, a real estate agent who helped organize a neighborhood assembly in the middle-class Buenos Aires neighborhood of Palermo Viejo.
"We know they will never be punished by the courts.
So the streets are being made unsafe for them.
At least that way they will be prisoners in their own homes."
So far, the response from politicians has been mixed.
Duhalde has proposed constitutional reforms that would reduce the number of legislators in Congress by 25 percent, cut their salaries and revamp the election system.
He also has called for replacing judges on the unpopular Supreme Court and reducing their number.
In Cordoba, the nation's second-most-populous province, voters last year cut by half the number of local legislators through a referendum, and similar proposals are sprouting up in other provinces.
Such regional bodies as the Buenos Aires city council are also moving to reduce their salaries and cut costs.
Yet Duhalde's 2002 budget proposes a modest increase for congressional expenses.
And last week, Duhalde quietly gave himself and other officials a 16 percent raise, to $3,000 a month.
One of the major obstacles to democratic reform, however, is that while Argentines seem to know what they do not want -- the two traditional parties -- they are less clear on what they would like instead.
Thousands of new citizen activists like Tobal are hoping a fresh crop of leaders will emerge to challenge the old guard, but it remains uncertain how and when that might take place.
For now, many fear that public discontent is fueling extremism.
Already, the weekly conventions of the new neighborhood assembly groups from across Buenos Aires, which take place every Sunday in a center-city park, have become a recruiting ground for a radical leftist group known as the Combative Class.
In Argentina's third-largest city, Rosario, a new right-wing political party has formed.
It includes officials formerly associated with the country's 1976-82 military dictatorship.
"People are looking for a magic solution, and that's always dangerous," said Congressman Juan Carlos Millet, who this month was forced to leave his favorite restaurant in his home province of Santa Fe after a group of patrons began banging on their glasses with spoons to protest his presence.
"People are clamoring for traditional politicians to go, but what they get instead could be just as bad, or worse."
Feb. 25
A new generation of drugs to fight the AIDS virus is showing promise in early testing, researchers reported today.
Scientists attending the 9th Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections the annual mid-winter U.S. AIDS meeting heard about developments in three new classes of HIV medicines, and about potent new members of one of the existing classes of drugs.
"It is a phase of accelerated development that's likely to keep pace with the current problem of drug resistance" in AIDS viruses carried by patients, said Brian Gazzard, a physician at Chelsea and Westminster Hospital in London.
"After a lull for two or three years, the sort of data we're seeing is very exciting."
There are 15 drugs on the market that inhibit replication of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) the essential strategy for slowing or stopping the disease's progression.
All work by attacking two of the three enzymes known as reverse transcriptase or protease that HIV employs inside a human cell.
The new compounds some not yet tested in people either target the third enzyme, called integrase, or seek to stop HIV before it even enters the cell.
In themselves, the new compounds don't appear markedly different from their predecessors.
HIV can also mutate into forms that resists their action, for example.
Their importance stems from the fact that they may offer alternatives to people who have run through the existing antiretroviral drugs.
Although there are no good studies quantifying the extent of the drug resistance problem, AIDS specialists say that 30 percent to 40 percent of their patients eventually need to change one of their medicines because of resistance.
Antiretroviral drugs are rarely prescribed alone, but usually in combinations of three or more drugs.
One of the new substances, being developed by the pharmaceutical firm Schering-Plough Corp., attaches to the CCR5 receptor, one of two parts of the docking bay that HIV uses to land on (and eventually pierce) cells of the human immune system.
It was tried in 12 people with moderately advanced HIV infection who were taking no other drugs.
The patients began with, on average, 40,000 viruses per milliliter of blood.
The compound, called SCH C, reduced the amount of bloodstream virus by 68 percent in 10 of the 12 people, and by 90 percent in 4 of them.
Earlier in development is a substance called BMS-806, which interferes with the virus's ability to attach to the other part of the docking bay, known as the CD4 receptor, on immune system cells.
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. researchers screened more than 100,000 compounds to find one with this particular action; the compound blocks gp120, a part of the HIV "envelope" that attaches to the CD4 receptor.
It's the first drug candidate to target that step.
In test-tube studies it was active against a wide variety of AIDS viruses.
Human tests probably will start sometime this year, said Richard Colonno, a company researcher.
The third new class of drugs described today is an "integrase inhibitor" being developed by Shionogi & Co., a Japanese pharmaceutical company.
(Integrase is the enzyme that stitches HIV's genes into the human cell's genes, making the infection permanent.)
It was highly active against strains of HIV that were resistant to reverse transcriptase and protease inhibitor drugs in other words, all the ones now available.
The compound, called S-1360, was well tolerated by rats and dogs.
A small study in human beings is underway.
Researchers here also heard about the early success of a drug specifically designed to avoid resistance problems encountered by nevirapine and efavirenz, the two existing members in its class of drugs, known as non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors.
125, made by the Belgian company Tibotec Inc., appears to have an unusually powerful effect on HIV replication.
In 12 patients it reduced the amount of circulating virus by nearly 99 percent when given alone for one week.
This was equivalent to the reduction seen several years ago in a study of a combination of five drugs.
125 will never be used alone because many antiretroviral drugs are extremely powerful at first, only to be rendered near-useless in weeks as the virus mutates.
Exactly how many AIDS patients in the United States and other wealthy countries are now dying because they exhaust all existing antiretroviral options is uncertain.
Reports from academic AIDS clinics suggest the number is small.
At the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center in Denver, the annual death rate of HIV patients under care has fallen from 13 percent in 1995 to 2.4 percent in 2000, said Robert Schooley, an AIDS physician there.
Furthermore, half the people who died in 2000 succumbed to non-AIDS illnesses or trauma.
In an unrelated presentation yesterday, Patricia Fleming, an epidemiologist at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said the estimate of the number of people living with HIV infection in the United States is 850,000 to 950,000.
That's 50,000 people higher than the estimate made in 1998.
Fleming said longer survival, not a rising number of new infections, is the reason for the higher number.
Information technology services giant Computer Sciences Corp. said it has decided to cancel a $400 million contract with troubled international communications carrier Global Crossing.
The IT outsourcing service contract between the two companies was inked little more than four months ago.
According to a Computer Sciences statement late Friday, the contract was valued at $400 million to Global Crossing and was yet to be implemented for Computer Sciences.
The contract will be terminated effective March 1, according to a new agreement between the companies.
"The $400 million contract ... is being terminated by mutual agreement following a determination that the agreement no longer serves the interests of both companies," Computer Sciences said in a statement.
Global Crossing, which was building fiber optic cable networks that circle the globe, filed for bankruptcy protection in January.
The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) is probing Global Crossing's accounting practices.
Various reports to the contrary, the Internet is not losing its importance for Americans, according to a new study from the Pew Internet and American Life Project.
If anything, the study says, the medium simply is becoming a routine part of everyday life.
The "longitudinal study" sought follow-up input in March 2001 from a group of 1,501 Internet users who first were interviewed by Pew researchers about Net-usage habits in March 2000.
Project director Lee Rainie said it is the first Pew study to re-interview survey respondents and monitor changes in Internet usage.
The data indicates that, the longer someone is online, the more sophisticated and serious they become about using the new medium.
"As they gain experience," the 27-page report states, "many Net surfers seemed less dazzled by the Internet.
As a result, they are less likely to e-mail a family member on a daily basis. ?
At the same time, users value the Internet as much or more than ever."
The report says that over time, the Internet simply becomes "a normal part of life's rhythms," and as a result people are becoming less likely to sing the Net's praises.
In March 2001, the report says, 79 percent of people indicated that e-mail was "very," or "somewhat" useful to them, compared to 88 percent of the same people who said as much a year before.
There also is a decline in the number of people who use e-mail to stay in touch with family on a daily basis, the report indicates, saying that the weekly e-mail has instead become a staple.
About 50 percent of Net users say they e-mail friends or family once a week.
"These changes in some users' perspectives are understandable," the report said.
"The initial excitement and fun of e-mailing a distant friend or family member is bound to make people at first herald the way the Internet enhances the feeling of closeness.
E-mail has gone from the remarkable to the reliable, but the lower buzz associated with the Internet has not supplanted the clear finding that Americans see the Internet as a good tool for keeping in touch with others."
Instead of sending a line or two every day, the report says, people have begun leaning toward sending longer, more complex e-mail to trusted friends, often to express worries or to seek advice.
The report says in the year between surveys researchers detected a 70 percent increase for all e-mailers sending messages to family members seeking advice, with a 63 percent spike in people sending posts to family members expressing worries.
Pew also noted an overall increase in the number of online activities people engage in.
In March 2000, the average Internet user had tried out 11 activities, which range from sending e-mail, engaging in e-commerce, surfing the Web, participating in chats and the like.
By March 2001, the average user had tried out 14 of the 24 activities Pew researchers asked about.
"More people used the Web to get health care information, news, financial information, and product information," the report states. "
The largest increments of growth in those types of activities came among Internet veterans.
"
There was a 6 percent increase in product purchases online, and an 8 percent increase in travel services between March 2000 and March 2001.
There also was a 6 percent increase online-auction participation.
There was little growth in "fun" activities, including searching the Web for hobby information, playing games and other diversions.
Rainie said that fun activities are what most Internet newcomers try out first, but as they gain confidence using the medium and gravitate toward other more serious activities such as seeking financial numbers, health information or daily news.
Among fun activities, only online music showed a significant increase.
The Internet is cutting into other "real world" activities.
The report says that 18 percent of Net users surveyed spent less time shopping in stores, while 28 percent of "Internet veterans" (those who have several years Net experience) said the same thing.
Newspapers are losing readers to the Internet as well, with 14 percent of respondents saying they read newspapers less, and 21 percent of Internet veterans reporting declining newspaper reading ?
though Pew says veterans are more likely to read online news.
The spam is getting worse.
Forty-four percent of respondents said in March 2001 that unwanted e-mail was a problem for them, compared to 33 percent who said so the previous year.
"I guess the most interesting to us is that all of the trends flow in the same direction," Rainie told Newsbytes.
"It would have been harder to interpret if some things were up and some things were down and there were no pattern to it.
But there's just a clear pattern that, in virtually every way you look at it, people get more serious."
Rainie said the results are a counterweight to a growing perception among media critics and other observers that the Internet is losing its luster ? and may be a passing fad.
"Since the stock market is down and since there have been stories here and there about people having less interest in the Internet, I think it's pretty widely believed ?
that the Internet might be a passing fad," Rainie said.
"And this data shows the exact opposite, that no matter what the vicissitudes of dot-com companies are, people are embracing this technology in really important ways."
Added Rainie: "A lot of people sort of think that the Internet is pass?
, that it's fading out of people's lives.
And this tells the exact opposite story."
As scientific arguments go, the great debate of recent years over how best to unravel the genetic map of the human race never seems to end.
Every time scientists think it has died down, the dispute comes roaring back.
The latest installment, due for electronic publication today in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, is a detailed analysis by three leading figures of the international Human Genome Project of the work done by their former competitor, Celera Genomics Corp.
That's the Rockville company that raced them to a draw two years ago in compiling a draft map of the genome, the entire complement of human genetic instructions.
The scientists conclude that the scientific paper Celera published about its experiment, an attempt to apply a fancy new technique to the problem of creating genetic maps, essentially didn't prove the case.
After analyzing that paper in detail, the scientists said the company relied so heavily on a public database compiled by the Human Genome Project that it's impossible to know whether Celera's rapid-fire approach would have worked on its own.
"We're not saying by any means that it can't be done," said Robert Waterston, director of gene sequencing at Washington University in St. Louis and lead author of the new paper.
If Celera had provided the proof in its published paper, "we would say fine, it does work," he said.
"They didn't."
People at Celera beg to differ.
They have always acknowledged using data from their competitors in the public project to cut costs and speed up their work.
But they deny that the information was crucial to their ability to produce a draft map of the genome.
"The fact is that the details they use to back up their arguments are either incorrect interpretations of our paper or outright errors in their approach," said Mark Adams, a senior Celera scientist on the genome project.
"There really is no basis for the claims they make."
Since relatively complete genetic maps became available in 2000, scientists say they have greatly accelerated research on biological problems such as cancer and heart disease.
But the maps themselves are still not entirely finished, and work continues on them.
In addition, scientists are working on mapping the genomes of laboratory rats, mice, dogs and other organisms useful for research.
The debate over how best to compile a map is a replay of a fevered argument that gripped the world of biology from 1998 to 2000.
In 1998, the Human Genome Project was moving along at a stately pace with the goal of producing a complete human genetic map by 2005.
Celera, an upstart biotechnology company run by a team of star scientists, was formed in 1998 with the goal of upending that timetable, producing a map more quickly, and selling access to it to drug companies and universities.
Mapping the human genome, conceived as one of the grand undertakings of modern science, quickly turned into a brawl.
Much of the clash was simply over bragging rights, but at root there was also a serious scientific question.
The human genetic code contains billions of chemical "letters" of deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA, encoding instructions for making the proteins that make up a human body.
To give them insight into human development, disease and aging, scientists want to know the exact order of those letters.
But modern machines can read only a few hundred letters at a time, so genomes have to be analyzed in tiny pieces and then put back together, like a vastly complicated jigsaw puzzle.
The Human Genome Project was using a proven technique that involved mapping the contours of relatively large pieces of DNA, then shredding those into tiny bits to be fed into the machines that read genetic letters.
It's a relatively slow, laborious approach, but one likely to give an accurate answer, because it minimizes the chance that any one piece of the jigsaw puzzle will wind up in the wrong place.
Adopting a more aggressive strategy, Celera decided instead to shred human DNA into millions of pieces all at once, then rely on the power of computers to put the pieces back together.
This approach promised speed, but it was also much riskier, because the chance of putting puzzle pieces into the wrong place was far higher.
Celera had the built-in advantage that it could use data from its publicly financed competitors, but the competitors couldn't use data from Celera.
Eventually the two sides put aside their differences long enough to declare the race a draw and announce their draft genome maps at the White House.
The new paper was written by three of the leading figures in the Human Genome Project Waterston, Eric Lander and John Sulston.
Waterston said in an interview that the group was reluctant to rehash an old debate "we actually thought about not publishing at all" but felt an important scientific question remained unresolved.
The central conclusion of the paper is that, because Celera relied in part on genome data compiled by a technique different from its own, the company cannot claim its more aggressive approach will work on large genomes like those of mammals.
"Our analysis indicates that it is not possible to draw meaningful conclusions about the [Celera] approach because the authors did not perform an analysis of their own data by itself," says the forthcoming paper.
Celera scientists rejected the conclusion.
The best evidence that the rapid technique does work, they said, is that a consortium of publicly funded laboratories is using a strategy much like it to map the genome of the laboratory mouse.
The public scientists acknowledged that point but said they assume the consortium will eventually have to do extra mapping work to make full sense of its data.
The federal government has decided not to expand a closely watched AIDS vaccine study because the vaccine has fallen short of prompting a key immune system response in volunteers, health officials said yesterday.
The AIDS vaccine regimen, one of many at various stages of testing in the United States and abroad, involves an initial "primer" shot made by Aventis Pasteur followed by a "booster" vaccine made by VaxGen of Brisbane, Calif.
Researchers had hoped that the federally funded study would shed light on which components of the immune system are most effective at fighting HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.
But results to date indicate that by one key measure, at least, the vaccine is not potent enough to answer that question, said Anthony S. Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, which has been funding the study.
That does not mean the U.S. government has lost faith in the vaccine combination, Fauci and others said.
A nearly identical regimen, with components made by the same two companies, has a good chance of being expanded into a large-scale, federally funded test in Thailand next year, health officials said yesterday.
That vaccine combination was already under study by the Department of Defense.
The program is to be shifted to the National Institutes of Health as part of a large-scale transfer of AIDS vaccine research from the military to the civilian sector.
The reorganization, ordered last month by the Office of Management and Budget, calls for oversight and administration of the Defense Department's AIDS research and development program to be transferred to the NIH from its current location in the U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command.
The move effectively consolidates within the NIH all federal AIDS vaccine research, which until now has been conducted by NIH and the Defense Department on two parallel and according to some critics, sometimes redundant tracks.
Despite years of research, scientists do not know which component of the immune system is best able to kill HIV information that could help them design more effective vaccines.
The "prime-boost" vaccine study known to the AIDS community as HVTN 203 had sought to answer that question but now appears unlikely to do so, Fauci said, because the study design had counted on a more robust effect than has been seen in volunteers.
But a differently designed study with a similar vaccine has a good chance of being expanded to include large numbers of volunteers in Thailand, Fauci said.
That study seeks to answer a simpler question "Does the vaccine help prevent HIV infection?" without trying to settle the question of how it may be providing that protection.
A large study of the VaxGen vaccine by itself is already underway in Thailand.
Feb. 25
A new generation of drugs to fight the AIDS virus is showing promise in early testing, researchers reported today.
Scientists attending the 9th Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections the annual mid-winter U.S. AIDS meeting heard about developments in three new classes of HIV medicines, and about potent new members of one of the existing classes of drugs.
"It is a phase of accelerated development that's likely to keep pace with the current problem of drug resistance" in AIDS viruses carried by patients, said Brian Gazzard, a physician at Chelsea and Westminster Hospital in London.
"After a lull for two or three years, the sort of data we're seeing is very exciting."
There are 15 drugs on the market that inhibit replication of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) the essential strategy for slowing or stopping the disease's progression.
All work by attacking two of the three enzymes known as reverse transcriptase or protease that HIV employs inside a human cell.
The new compounds some not yet tested in people either target the third enzyme, called integrase, or seek to stop HIV before it even enters the cell.
In themselves, the new compounds don't appear markedly different from their predecessors.
HIV can also mutate into forms that resists their action, for example.
Their importance stems from the fact that they may offer alternatives to people who have run through the existing antiretroviral drugs.
Although there are no good studies quantifying the extent of the drug resistance problem, AIDS specialists say that 30 percent to 40 percent of their patients eventually need to change one of their medicines because of resistance.
Antiretroviral drugs are rarely prescribed alone, but usually in combinations of three or more drugs.
One of the new substances, being developed by the pharmaceutical firm Schering-Plough Corp., attaches to the CCR5 receptor, one of two parts of the docking bay that HIV uses to land on (and eventually pierce) cells of the human immune system.
It was tried in 12 people with moderately advanced HIV infection who were taking no other drugs.
The patients began with, on average, 40,000 viruses per milliliter of blood.
The compound, called SCH C, reduced the amount of bloodstream virus by 68 percent in 10 of the 12 people, and by 90 percent in 4 of them.
Earlier in development is a substance called BMS-806, which interferes with the virus's ability to attach to the other part of the docking bay, known as the CD4 receptor, on immune system cells.
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. researchers screened more than 100,000 compounds to find one with this particular action; the compound blocks gp120, a part of the HIV "envelope" that attaches to the CD4 receptor.
It's the first drug candidate to target that step.
In test-tube studies it was active against a wide variety of AIDS viruses.
Human tests probably will start sometime this year, said Richard Colonno, a company researcher.
The third new class of drugs described today is an "integrase inhibitor" being developed by Shionogi & Co., a Japanese pharmaceutical company.
(Integrase is the enzyme that stitches HIV's genes into the human cell's genes, making the infection permanent.)
It was highly active against strains of HIV that were resistant to reverse transcriptase and protease inhibitor drugs in other words, all the ones now available.
The compound, called S-1360, was well tolerated by rats and dogs.
A small study in human beings is underway.
Researchers here also heard about the early success of a drug specifically designed to avoid resistance problems encountered by nevirapine and efavirenz, the two existing members in its class of drugs, known as non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors.
125, made by the Belgian company Tibotec Inc., appears to have an unusually powerful effect on HIV replication.
In 12 patients it reduced the amount of circulating virus by nearly 99 percent when given alone for one week.
This was equivalent to the reduction seen several years ago in a study of a combination of five drugs.
125 will never be used alone because many antiretroviral drugs are extremely powerful at first, only to be rendered near-useless in weeks as the virus mutates.
Exactly how many AIDS patients in the United States and other wealthy countries are now dying because they exhaust all existing antiretroviral options is uncertain.
Reports from academic AIDS clinics suggest the number is small.
At the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center in Denver, the annual death rate of HIV patients under care has fallen from 13 percent in 1995 to 2.4 percent in 2000, said Robert Schooley, an AIDS physician there.
Furthermore, half the people who died in 2000 succumbed to non-AIDS illnesses or trauma.
In an unrelated presentation yesterday, Patricia Fleming, an epidemiologist at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said the estimate of the number of people living with HIV infection in the United States is 850,000 to 950,000.
That's 50,000 people higher than the estimate made in 1998.
Fleming said longer survival, not a rising number of new infections, is the reason for the higher number.
Mark Stavish, America Online's executive vice president for human resources, is new chairman of the board of the Loudoun County Chamber of Commerce.
Stavish came to the Internet service provider in 1995 from senior human resources jobs at Pepsi Co. Inc. and Mobil Oil Corp.
Since then, he has tended AOL's rapid growth from fewer than 1,000 employees in two domestic sites to more than 15,000 employees worldwide in more than 148 locations in 40 countries.
When AOL moved to Dulles from Vienna in 1996, it was largely Stavish's decision.
According to Stavish, one of the company's main concerns at the time was that it might lose workers who wouldn't want to commute to Dulles every day.
The result?
"We lost three employees," he said.
"That was about it, and now we can't keep them out of the place."
In an interview last week, Stavish talked about his plans for the chamber and shared his thoughts on Loudoun County, AOL and the technology industry in Northern Virginia.
hat are your goals for the year ahead as chairman of the board?
ell
, I think we've got four goals.
First, we really want to continue the momentum we've got with our small-business community.
Second, we want to be really clear and crisp on our public policy positions and to advocate for things that will help business grow here in Loudoun County.
Third, it's all about transition to become the "E-Chamber" building a much more connected business community by using our Web sites and this new electronic medium.
Finally, we want to continue to expand our membership base.
We'd like to get our membership base to 1,500 members, up from 1,200.
What made you want to take the job?
A sense of wanting to contribute to the county.
Loudoun County's been very good to AOL, [and] it's been very good to me and my family.
How long has AOL been a member of the Loudoun County Chamber of Commerce?
Since early 1996, when we first moved out to Loudoun County.
It's allowed us to build better relationships in the county, [and] we've made some good friendships along the way, friendships that have evolved into business relationships.
For example, Atlantic Coast Airlines runs our AOL proprietary shuttle back and forth from Dulles [International] Airport to New York and from Dulles airport to Columbus [Ohio] and back.
I don't know if we would have done that had we not known the Atlantic Coast Airlines people from the chamber.
Most chamber members are small businesses.
AOL is not exactly a small business.
How are you going to meet the needs and issues of the vast majority of the small companies that make up that constituency?
Small businesses want opportunities to build their businesses, whether it's networking events or information about business opportunities or opportunities to share ideas.
I think the backbone of the chamber is small business.
But what really helps make that go is to have a good number of large businesses active in the chamber.
When you have just sheer numbers of business people together, good ideas get shared, leads get shared and that's what builds a vibrant chamber.
We understand the challenges a small business sees.
When I started with AOL, we had 700 employees.
Now, that's not a small business, but we've got 18,000 now.
So we know what it's like to try to build a business.
A lot of our executives started with small businesses.
[AOL Chairman and CEO] Barry Schuler was acquired as a small-business entrepreneur.
[AOL Vice Chairman]
Ted Leonsis was acquired as a small-business entrepreneur.
So, we think we've got a kindred spirit with small-business people, but big businesses need to be there to form the nexus of the chamber.
At the end of the day, it's the small-business owner or entrepreneur that really is the spirit of the chamber, and we're going to help create those networks and those opportunities and events to enable them to grow their businesses.
Barry Schuler has referred to last year as a "character building year."
Do you see any positive indications for AOL for the year ahead?
I think AOL's going to continue to grow as a business.
We've got another 200,000-square-foot building under construction right now on our campus.
We'll probably take a number of our employees who are in Reston right now, our network engineers, our data center operations, and we'll move some of those folks out to the campus.
We have a call center location in Herndon.
They're really the administrative offices of our call center operations, so we'll be moving those out to the Dulles campus.
had layoffs last year.
Is AOL doing any hiring now?
Yes.
We completed the merger with Time Warner in January of 2001.
There's always going to be some redundancies between organizations, and that was the case there.
As we take a look at the future, we're going to constantly be hiring network engineers, software engineers, good business development people.
Those needs are ongoing.
What's ahead for the technology community in Northern Virginia in general?
I think in the long run, the technology community's going to be just fine.
We're going through the aftermath of the bubble-bursting of the dot-com industries, but look, Northern Virginia is right in the center of the Internet.
We have lots of people here, we're squarely in the middle of building out the Internet infrastructure and as the next wave of the Internet begins to take off, I believe the businesses in Northern Virginia will be at the heart of that.
I just don't see any other conclusion.
Moving AOL to Loudoun County was largely your call.
What attracted you to the area?
Well, I'd like to say I was a smart strategic guy
and I could see the future, but the fact of the matter is there were two big pieces of property that were in existence in Northern Virginia.
One was down at Westfields [in Fairfax], and the other was here out in Loudoun County, which was the old British Aerospace property.
I'll tell you what attracted us.
First of all, we felt that the county government was very receptive to having AOL move out here, and they were helpful in getting our permits approved so we could build out the property very quickly.
The old adage "time is money" is really true, especially when you're in a fast-growing business, and the county helped us through moving permits very quickly, helped us build out our property very, very quickly so we found that the county was very supportive.
Where do you stand on "smart growth" in Loudoun?
I think smart growth is one of those things where if you ask 15 people, they probably have 15 definitions of what smart growth is.
There's no magic elixir that's going to fix everybody's problems except keeping the dialogue open and then making good decisions.
I think communities like Ashburn and Cascades are good ideas.
Planned communities are good ideas.
You build schools and parks and shopping centers in and around homes and town houses.
I think that's smart growth.
Making sure that you accommodate rail coming out to Loudoun County and you build business and residential concentrations around where that rail loop is going to go, I think, is smart growth.
The one thing that AOL and, I think, the chamber has tried to do throughout the last year of the debate over this Comprehensive Plan is to ensure that there is a fair and even-minded discussion of the issues because we believe that's the most important component to getting to the right solution.
The official headquarters of AOL Time Warner, after the merger between the two companies, is in New York.
Has that changed anything at the Dulles campus?
It hasn't changed much of anything.
We probably moved about 30 people up to New York.
The fact of the matter is that AOL headquarters remains in Dulles, Virginia, and will remain there and will play a very prominent role in the future of AOL Time Warner.
That would allow computer makers to install competitors' products, if they chose, without taking on the added cost of supporting both products.
Currently, Microsoft's ubiquitous Windows has a leg up on competitors vying for the hearts of consumers and software designers.
In a videotaped deposition released Monday, Microsoft vice president and Windows chief
Jim Allchin said Microsoft has "no way" to remove the browser from the company's flagship operating system.
"I couldn't do what you've got here," said Allchin, suffering from a severe cold. "
Forget about any business thing.
Technically I just couldn't do it."
Allchin said the company has done no studies to see if it could be done.
He referred to an especially embarrassing part of Microsoft's case, in which the company showed a videotape to make the argument that Windows would be damaged if a user attempted to remove the Internet Explorer Web browser.
Microsoft later admitted the demonstration computer was rigged.
"Do you have any expectation as to whether or not you will be putting together a similar demonstration for this part of the case?"
state lawyers asked.
"Not exactly like that one," Allchin said.
Steve Ballmer, a college friend of company founder Bill Gates and current chief executive officer, said Microsoft would be forced to offer an infinite number of Windows versions under the states' demands, all with or without extra features.
Ballmer said if the states should prevail with their demands, the decision would serve the interests of neither computer manufacturers nor users.
Instead, Ballmer said companies like Sun Microsystems, whose relationship with Microsoft is notoriously prickly, would dedicate themselves to frustrating Microsoft engineers.
The nine states revised their proposed penalties Monday.
The new version reflects many complaints leveled by Ballmer and other executives.
For example, Microsoft would have to offer only one stripped-down version of Windows instead of many different ones.
Ballmer complained that it would be too expensive to build a version of the Java programming language to package with Windows, as requested by the states.
The states clarified that Microsoft wouldn't have to bear those costs.
Connecticut Attorney General Richard Blumenthal said the modifications "clarify and sharpen our proposed remedies, without weakening them."
"The modified measures should deflate Microsoft's overblown rhetoric and apocalyptic predictions about the proposed remedies," Blumenthal said.
Brad Smith, Microsoft's general counsel, would not comment on the changes.
"It appears to be a number of changes made very late," Smith said.
The company is still reviewing the document, he said.
Allchin admitted to lawyers for the states that Microsoft violated the law but refused to specify the violations.
"I don't think that I can summarize those," Allchin said.
"I'm not an attorney."
The company faces several allegations of violations that involve infringing on consumer choice and unfairly hurting competitors.
The states' lawyers, Stephen Houck and Mark Breckler, asked if it would be important for the head Windows executive to know what the violations were, so they wouldn't be repeated.
"Well, it's a very complicated area," Allchin said.
"Very complicated."
Have a comment on this article?
Send it .
Printing?
Use this version.
Although the company admits there are still kinks to be worked out in the current version of Aimster, it's already logged over 4 million users. 
But in the golden era of Britney, Aimster knows that hot technology is only as hot as its spokesmodel, and the early returns show that Aimee is "It." 
Standing outside the Knight's Tale movie premiere in New York City, Aimee gushes, "It's really cool!
I love being here!
I've always wanted to be a celebrity.
Aimster's a way to get my name out there." 
Her name is not the only thing she's putting out.
On the front door of the Aimster site , Aimee welcomes users in a slinky black dress slit up to there and a come-hither look that would get other girls her age grounded. 
Elsewhere on the site, she leaves little to the imagination in a white string bikini . 
While many may call her overexposed, like any savvy It Girl, Aimee has managed to maintain an air of mystery, keeping Aimster fans asking, "who is that HOT chick?" 
The short answer is that she's the daughter of Aimster-founder Johnny Deep, who now serves double-duty as Aimee's publicist. 
"She's been pushing her mom and me to let her do this for some time now," he said.
"But I kind of insisted that she wait until she turn 16, at which point it'd be her decision," he said. 
It just so happens that Aimee's social promotion coincides with the launch of Aimster E, a new version of the software that allows IM-file swapping within small-enterprise-level networks. 
But the real buzz is over whether Aimee's for real.
On the Aimster Girl Fanclub discussion board , some fans speculate that she's a hired model. 
It is hard to believe she's the same, slightly awkward girl-next-door who appeared on the site previously as " Madeleine ," the first name she no longer goes by.
She certainly doesn't look 16. 
"Is that a compliment?"
Aimee asks in a voice so sweet and earnest it's hard to believe that she's past the age of curfew.
"I like being 16, so I always tell people that's how old I am.
I just got my driver's permit two weeks ago." 
A high-school sophomore, Aimee is a cheerleader and a member of a club called Future Teachers.
She "loves all kinds of music," especially Faith Hill and Britney Spears, and she thinks Julia Roberts is the coolest. 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
Intel has dominated the PC chip market for decades, but the company recently said that its revenue will be 25 percent off previous projections.
And the company said a slowing demand for PCs will cut into its prospects for the foreseeable future. 
said it hasn't felt a similar slowdown, and is moving ahead with new chips.
"The world is still turning" said Robert Stead, AMD's director of European marketing. 
Stead said the company has not changed its outlook on future chip sales.
AMD's newest effort to prey on a weakened Intel is a 1.3 GHz Athlon chip, which is now shipping to customers, and should be in PCs on store shelves soon. 
Do-it-yourselfers can also upgrade their PCs by buying chips from sites like CNET or ZDNet. 
Stead said that because of its faster communications with memory and other optimizations, the chip runs about as fast as a 1.7 GHz Intel chip.
Intel's fastest chip runs at 1.5 GHz. 's chip works with DDR (double data rate) memory, which Stead said is superior to Rambus memory that is supported by Intel. "
(DDR) is a better sprinter" since it sends information to the CPU quicker, he said. 
Stead admitted that Rambus was a better "marathoner," since it has faster bandwidth once an exchange of data has been started. 
But AMD's biggest challenger to Intel could be its unique 64-bit chip. 
Ever since Intel helped to create the PC market, it has created new chip designs to keep feeding it.
Other companies would then reverse-engineer those capabilities and manufacture chips that could also run Intel-friendly software. 's Hammer chip, which will be out by the end of the year, is a proprietary design, so software companies will have to decide to create separate versions of their products and Intel's future Itanium processor. 
is working closely with Linux developers to rally support for its chip.
The company has posted software that simulates how the new chip works on the x86-64.org website, where open-source programmers can contribute to the Linux effort. is also paying SuSE, Europe's largest Linux development company, to help the software along. 
But getting Microsoft to support the new chip will likely make or break AMD's effort.
AMD software engineer Mats Peterson said a smiling "no commment" about any possible talks with Microsoft, but acknowledged that its chip is dead if it can't run Windows. 
Peterson said that the chip will be used in desktops, workstations and servers running Linux. 
Intel was not showing off any new chips at CeBIT, Europe's largest IT show, but spokesman Hans-Jurgen Werner said the company isn't ready to cede the Linux market to AMD. 
Werner said Intel has invested in Linux software companies Red Hat as well as SuSE, and has is even paying its customers to rewrite their software for its Itanium chip. 
Intel has created a $243 million fund that customers such as Bank of America can get money from to pay outside agencies to develop Itanium software. 
"The Itanium rollout is different than anything else we have done before," Werner said.
Intel has distributed compilers for its new chips, and have likewise made an Itanium simulator available to open-source developers. 
Intel is also working with Microsoft on a version of its future Whistler operating system to run on the chip.
That OS should be out by summer. 
Werner said the Rambus memory architecture is better for working with future processors that have wider bus pipelines. 
will be in for a challenge in directly competing with Intel, Werner said, pointing out that Sun Microsystems and others had tried and failed.
And asking software developers to write separate code for AMD may be unreasonable. 
"I'm not sure if you can develop a 64-bit architecture with all of its complexity as a niche within a niche," Werner said. 
Despite Intel's dark profit picture, Werner said the company is still committed to spending $4.2 billion on research this year. 
Via Technologies, which recently acquired Cyrix, a chipmaker that had tried and failed to take a considerable market share from Intel, also had new offerings at CeBIT.
But they aren't ready to go toe-to-toe with Intel just yet. 
Via is instead focusing on creating a larger market for $200-$300 PCs, and the company announced new 700 MHz chips.
Shane Dennison, manager of international marketing at AMD said going underneath, instead of at Intel, is the best strategy for now.
"We're learning to crawl before we can walk," Dennison said. 
Dennison said Via is making a chipset that allows motherboards that use DDR memory systems to work with Intel CPUs to give customers an alternative. 
"Intel is committed to Rambus (because of significant financial investments)," Dennison said.
"We feel it is not the answer." 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version. 
Copyright 2001 Wired Digital Inc., a Lycos Network site.
All rights reserved.
Although it has mounted cumulative cash losses of $139 million, the 3-year-old company is expecting sales to rise as it gains a following overseas and among small businesses. 
What's more, the company's status as a preferred payment method on eBay auctions gives it ties to one of the Internet's most established success stories. 
This being 2002, however -- and a period in which ambitious Internet startups are virtually absent from the lineup of companies launching initial public offerings -- market-watchers are scratching their heads in wonderment at how PayPal made it onto the list. 
"It's a classic dot-com of the past.
Fast-growing revenues and losses to match
," said John Fitzgibbon, editor of IPODesktop and a former IPO syndicate manager. 
Disproving the skeptics, the Palo Alto company is preparing to launch an offering as early as Wednesday on the Nasdaq exchange.
The company -- which provides a system for sending money by e-mail -- says it plans to use the money to buy equipment, improve processing of payments and expand overseas. 
PayPal is planning to offer 5.4 million shares for between $12 and $14 apiece -- a mid-size offering by Nasdaq standards.
But Wall Street will be watching closely to see if it takes off at a time when most recent successful IPO candidates have come from the biotech, pharmaceutical and health-care industries. 
Despite the fact that it looks like an e-fish out of water, Fitzgibbon predicts that PayPal will see some small gains in first-day trading.
He attributes this forecast less to the fundamentals of the company than to the assumption that the investment banks underwriting the offering, led by Salomon Smith Barney, have done their research. 
"It's quite costly to file.
They wouldn't go to this expense unless they thought they could pull it off," he said. 
Looking at PayPal's history, it's also worth noting that the company has a record of pulling off what rivals have failed to accomplish. 
In the industry in which PayPal competes, referred to by analysts as "online alternative payments," the field is littered with promising startups that failed to capitalize on plans for revolutionizing the mechanisms of money transfer. 
The list ranges from experimental online currencies, like Beenz, Flooz and Cybergold, to electronic cash offerings like DigiCash.
Entrepreneurial visions have largely wound up in bankruptcy. 
James Van Dyke, a financial services analyst at Jupiter Media Metrix, goes so far as to call PayPal the "only success story" in the alternative payment business.
More than any other factor, he credits PayPal's rise to its popularity among eBay auction patrons. 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
Daum, which controls 20 percent of Korea's instant messaging market, filed the complaint Wednesday with the Korea Fair Trade Commission.
It appears to be the first legal challenge against Microsoft in South Korea. 
The release of Windows XP "increases competitors' costs and takes away the opportunity for consumers to compare products on the basis of product quality," said Daum spokesman Kwon Kyung-ah. 
Microsoft denied the accusation Thursday and said the company would cooperate with the commission investigation. 
"We believe our business practices are legal and fair in accordance with consumer interests and the PC industry," said Kwon Chan, Microsoft Korea's spokesman. 
Kim Sung-ha of the Korea Fair Trade Commission, said, "If unfair and illegal business practices are found, we will issue corrective orders to Microsoft." 
Still, one analyst was skeptical that Daum could block the new Microsoft software. 
"I think the Windows XP will be released without much problem in South Korea," said D.H. Heo, a senior analyst at Good Morning Securities.
"I do not think a dramatic step will be taken on a relatively small issue as this." 
Windows XP has already drawn criticism from U.S. competitors and lawmakers who say the system continues the type of anticompetitive practices that led a U.S. appeals court to label the company an illegal monopoly. 
On Thursday the U.S. Justice Department announced that it will no longer seek a court-ordered breakup of Microsoft and that it will not pursue the bundling issues in its protracted antitrust suit against the software giant. 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
March 31, 2000
An absence of DVD players for users of the Linux OS created a hacking scandal to, well, start all hacking scandals.
But now, a company has developed a legal box, and geeks are smiling.
By Michelle Finley. 
March 30, 2000 Script kiddie MostHateD can't make his arraignment on computer cracking charges, because he's in jail for stealing a car and burglarizing a house.
By Lynn Burke. 
March 28, 2000
What would happen if a bunch of Linux types staged a protest over an arcane DVD copyright law and nobody came?
It wasn't exactly nobody, but a good time was had by all 20 of 'em.
Declan McCullagh reports from Washington. 
March 22, 2000 IBM execs say the creation of the world's fastest Linux supercomputer will revolutionize science.
Then it'll take on e-commerce.
By Michelle Finley and John Gartner. 
March 17, 2000 Mattel gets a federal court order against a program that reveals CyberPatrol's off-limits sex sites.
But the utility is already being mirrored -- is there anything the company can do?
By Declan McCullagh.
"The metrics on Pogo.com have gotten so big, we couldn't ignore them anymore," said Jeff Brown, Electronic Arts vice president of corporate communications.
"It's not like we had a huge shift in content.
People just love those games." 
Advertisers and sponsors began approaching Electronic Arts with ideas to capitalize on the newly discovered audience.
So EA executives started tailoring their online games. 
The company is developing games like home run derby.
When the balls start flying out of the baseball park, it will clear a wall covered with advertising logos. 
But boys playing baseball aren't the only ones going online for a quickie. 
RealNetworks launched its game division in May with a mix of downloadable and browser-based games.
The downloads give designers room to build complex features into the programs, while browser games are generally simple, easy-to-learn games. 
It was a no-brainer for RealNetworks, which offers a wide variety of Internet music, video and entertainment.
The RealArcade quickly became big business.
What executives didn't expect was the crowd they would draw, said Paul Thelen, RealNetworks' group product manager. 
"While we do have an action segment of gamers, 51 percent of our users are women, and 80 percent are over 30," Thelen said. 
People have downloaded over 2 million free downloads, demos and moderately priced games. 
Now advertisers are approaching RealNetworks as they did Electronic Arts.
The corporation is developing games as companions to the traditional male-oriented, first-person shooter and sports genres. 
"We promote the games that sell, and our base is getting skewed toward this new demographic," Thelen said.
"We started out with more traditional games, but now we're adding family-friendly games like Monopoly 2 and Roller Coaster Tycoon." 
That doesn't mean kinder, gentler games are on the way.
The home video game boom ensures that.
Microsoft's XBox and Sony's Playstation2 consoles provide high-speed connections to young people who want immediate access to new games.
That core audience is expected to maintain the lion's share of game purchases. 
Sony and Yahoo Japan teamed up last week to develop broadband services in early 2002 for the Playstation2, which will soon have the capability of connecting to the Internet.
The challenge for these companies is to convince hard-core game players to purchase a game they can't hold. 
"I think at the moment, we're still a year away with these online, streaming services," said Craig Eastman, director of online product development for GamePro , a gaming media company.
"We'll see what happens with the XBox, when the console comes in the home.
The challenge is that the consumer still wants something in their hands." 
Wild Tangent will test that theory, Eastman said, when it starts selling Dark Orbit and Betty Bad online.
The games aren't for the home console, and they can only be purchased as streams. 
Some retailers have started renting streamed versions of their games, crediting the fee toward the purchase of a physical CD-ROM. 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
DiBona was in the unenviable position of having only three weeks to dream up a few dozen questions to pose to the always eerily intelligent contestants.
The questions had to be challenging enough to strain the combatants' brains and give the audience enough time to merrily jeer -- but not so difficult that they would send contestants into a petulant and protracted silence. 
DiBona had a particularly tight preparation timetable because he was a last-minute substitute for the Bowl's usual host, Nicholas Petreley, who had to back out due to family commitments. 
DiBona's first thought when he agreed to host was that he'd have to get started on coding a program to manage the game and the scoring. 
"I figured it'd be easier to write my own program than learn how to use someone else's software," he said.
"I was also a bit concerned that Nick's software had displayed a rather alarming tendency to freeze and offer up random answers to the questions at the San Francisco 2001 bowl." 
DiBona, the program manager of events for the Open Source Development Network , coded the software in less than a week, and happily accepted help from Linux community members Eric Raymond, Nate Oostendorp and Rick Moon to come up with questions that "any proper geek would know inside and out." 
The foursome made up a list of subjects spanning high tech to very low pop culture.
Then they picked apart the source material to find some obscure little queries with which to torment the contestants. 
"I wanted the game to be just stressful enough to be enjoyable.
I wanted to ask the sort of questions that you know you know the answer to somewhere in the darkest corner of your mind, but you have to struggle a little to recall the information," DiBona said.
"I also wanted people in the audience to be squirming in their seats, because they knew the answers and were trying to hold back and not shout out the reply." 
Contestants were divided into two teams, the "Geeks" and "Nerds."
Each team had three pre-selected open source experts (some nervous laughing ensued when the introductions revealed that three of the six experts were currently unemployed), as well as two people who were plucked randomly from the audience. 
The bowl once again proved that the people who attend LinuxWorld know the strangest things, like what series of science fiction books features the characters Gurney Halleck, Paul Atreides, Duncan Idaho and Feyd-Rautha, and what encryption technology was patented on Sept. 20, 1983.
They also know the original name of America Online, the four bases that make up DNA, and what species of penguin calls Phillip Island at the southern tip of Australia its home. 
"These people just scare the hell out of me," a reporter for a local newspaper, who was in the audience, said.
"It's hard to believe that they didn't get issued a totally different sort of brain from the rest of us." 
The Nerds beat the Geeks by about 1,000 points.
No one seemed to care about the final score, but the Nerds proudly clutched their glass-blown golden penguin statuettes and thanked "the Academy." 
The questions and answers can be found at DiBona's website . 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
June 30, 2000
A long-running banking scandal.
Encrypted CD-ROMs.
If hackers opposed to the continued domination of the ruling PRI can crack the code, Mexico's fate may be changed forever.
Mike Kamber reports from Mexico City. 
June 30, 2000 Can congressional websites set cookies?
They're not bound by edict, but the flap over cookies on government websites is affecting those sites that do.
By Declan McCullagh. 
June 29, 2000
Distributed computing projects -- where people donate part of their computer space to massive computational efforts -- used to be strictly for the proud and geeky.
Now, it's for money, too.
By Andy Patrizio. 
June 27, 2000
Transmeta unveils new mobile processors to challenge on Intel.
Both companies want to provide chips for the new round of lightweight notebooks offering wireless connections and all day battery life.
John Gartner reports from PC Expo in New York. 
June 27, 2000
The "Honeynet Project" threw out easy bait, hoping to catch a live denial-of-service attack.
They found a good one, and also an interesting phenomenon: hackers like to improvise.
By Chris Oakes. 
June 27, 2000
Long gone are the days when everybody and her mother attended trade shows such as PC Expo and Comdex.
Now, even the big computer companies are deciding not to set up booths.
Michelle Delio reports from New York. 
June 26, 2000
The White House, embarrassed by its use of cookies on a government drug site, issues an edict to all Federal departments: no more cookies (except for a few exceptions, of course). 
June 26, 2000
While Internet companies are tripping over one another to stake out ground in the electronic voting marketplace, election officials warn that too much too quick could backfire.
By Lynn Burke. 
June 23, 2000
A software consultant figures out a flaw in a slot machine, then posts the information on the Internet.
Now he's being sued by the gaming manufacturer after being banned from several casinos.
Charles Mandel reports from Edmonton, Alberta. 
June 22, 2000
A day after the White House admitted it may have violated federal privacy guidelines by tracking users who searched for drug-related info, privacy advocates called on Congress to investigate. 
June 21, 2000
The FBI's mammoth computer that approves prospective gun purchasers is about as buggy as a bayou pickup's windshield.
The Senate Judiciary Committee wants to know why it's not working.
Declan McCullagh and Nicholas Morehead report from Washington. 
June 19, 2000
They patented the system of hyperlinking more than 10 years ago, British Telecom officials say, and now they want their royalties.
Looks like a patent battle for the digital ages.
By Craig Bicknell.
In a DDOS attack, a computer is swamped with an overwhelming number of requests that are disguised to look innocuous, so that the website that it controls grinds to a halt. 
Experts say tens of thousands of such attacks occur each year -- and that a far greater number probably go unreported by companies fearful of hurting their business. 
Six-year-old CloudNine was forced to sell its business and hand over 2,500 customers to its rival Zetnet. 
"The basic reasoning was we would have needed to bring the network offline for far too long (to make repairs).
We just came to the conclusion that we couldn't continue," said co-founder Emeric Miszti. 
Two other recent victims of DDOS attacks were the British Internet portal of the Italian ISP Tiscali, whose service was halted for several days, and the British Internet provider Donhost, which was knocked out for a few hours. 
"It's not just a game of taking down one server," said Stephane Huet, acting chief operating officer for Tiscali UK.
"It affects portal revenues if the rest of the world cannot access it.
It has a powerful business impact.
" 
The motivation for such attacks is diverse.
Many hackers are simply after illicit thrills, while others seek publicity for a particular cause.
It is now common in wars, especially civil ones, for each side to sabotage the other's websites. 
Past targets include sites associated with the White House and the Palestinian Authority. 
A DDOS attack last week is also suspected to have sabotaged a live online chat with the Dutch crown prince and his Argentinian fiancee. 
In the case of CloudNine, the DDOS attack prevented users served by the company from logging onto the Internet and shut off access to websites hosted on its network. 
"It was a very methodical attack," said Miszti. 
"It occurred over a number of months.
Their objective was to map out our network, identifying the key servers and determining their capacity.
Then they knew how to attack with the appropriate force." 
Miszti says he is not sure why his firm was targeted and has no clear idea who was behind it. 
He and Tiscali are both working with police, but computer experts say DDOS investigations are rarely successful. 
"If (hackers take) reasonable precautions, it would be very difficult to track them down," said Gary Milo, managing director of security start-up Webscreen Technologies, which has developed software to protect companies against such attacks. 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
2:00 a.m. PST PayPal is poised to launch a stock offering at a time when few investors are interested in Internet companies.
Is there more to the story?
By Joanna Glasner. 
2:00 a.m. PST Palm's newly renamed software division unveils a faster and much more robust new operating system.
What does this mean for the PDA market?
By Elisa Batista. 
8:25 a.m.
PST HP and Compaq set dates for shareholder voting on their proposed merger.
Also: Kenneth Lay resigns from Enron's board....
European regulators drop an investigation into charges that Intel unfairly squelched competition.... and more. 
Monday Philips, the Dutch electronics manufacturer, appears on a collision course with the record labels over its objection to copy-protection codes burned into CDs.
The fight could be the format's death knell.
By Paul Boutin. 
Monday America Online's music service, with its bundling of downloads and streams and radio and chat and music news, is a prime example of how the online music business is changing.
By Brad King. 
Monday CEOs of high tech firms at the World Economic Forum disagree with predictions that an economic turnaround is just around the corner. 
Monday Silicon Valley's rise continues to lure other communities into building tech clusters, despite its recent fall.
A new book intrigues many planners about where the next valleys will be built, and how.
Tania Hershman reports from Jerusalem. 
Monday The new Palm operating system, the beta version of which will be unveiled Tuesday, could make or break the company, analysts say.
By Elisa Batista. 
Monday Private Media withdraws plans to issue some 50 million euros worth of shares.
Also: Arthur Andersen hires a former Federal Reserve chairman to improve its business strategies.... and more. Monday Sky Dayton, who founded Earthlink, thinks his second fortune will come with his new outfit, which serves up wireless networking. 
Saturday Exactly what material -- and exactly who -- is being restricted under Australia's controversial online content law remains a mystery to some, critics claim.
Proponents say it's doing a great job of limiting children's access to porn.
Stewart Taggart reports from Sydney. 
Friday Big business tended to muscle out the geeks and hackers at the recently concluded LinuxWorld 2002 convention, making it clear a bridge between the two has yet to be built.
Michelle Delio reports from New York. 
Friday Microsoft hires a top computer security expert.
Also: Microsoft will reimburse nine states $10 million for legal expenses....
Priceline.com will create a new travel booking service for eBay.... and more. 
Friday A denial-of-service attack forces the shutdown and sale of a longtime English ISP, causing great concern among e-businesses everywhere. 
Where's The Money? 
Friday Revenue recognition is getting fresh attention this year.
A big question is whether companies booked money from sales earlier than they should have.
By Joanna Glasner. 
Friday The ivory tower of European basic science is under siege from venture capitalists scouring the academic world for marketable ideas, just like they've been doing in the cash-conscious United States for decades.
Daith? ?
hAnluain reports from Ireland. 
Thursday Linux users and developers have two new tools that will enable all applications written for the operating system to run on all compliant versions.
Michelle Delio reports from LinuxWorld 2002 in New York. 
Thursday One of the highlights of every LinuxWorld is the Golden Penguin Bowl quiz.
This year, open source stalwart
Chris DiBona was a late replacement as emcee, and he lived up to the task.
Michelle Delio reports from New York. 
Thursday The European Commission approves HP's proposed takeover of Compaq Computer.
Also: Microsoft and the U.S. Justice Department may have a hearing to defend their proposed settlement....
EBay and Sotheby's form a partnership.... and more. 
Thursday The FCC's battle with NextWave may continue before the Supreme Court.
If that happens, attorneys and analysts say the bankrupt company is kaput.
By Elisa Batista. 
Thursday Palm is losing market share in Europe.
Also: Police patrol the Super Bowl wirelessly....
Handspring responds to Palm's i705....
A London court stiffens the penalty for mobile phone theft.... and more, in this week's Unwired News.
By Elisa Batista. 
Thursday An Internet privacy group creates a program that allows readers to identify the sender of an unsolicited e-mail prior to opening it.
By Julia Scheeres. 
Jan. 30, 2002 LinuxWorld 2002 is a staid, serious affair -- even with the announcement that Linux coding will soon be available on Sony's PlayStation 2.
Michelle Delio reports from New York. 
Jan. 30, 2002
The man facing a $65 million court judgment for stealing the domain name Sex.com is asking a court to drop its order against him, saying the ruling left him so poor he can't afford toilet paper.
By Joanna Glasner. 
Jan. 30, 2002
The fun new game on stock message boards is guessing which company will follow Enron's footsteps in the next big bankruptcy scandal.
So far, the nominees seem to include half the public companies in America.
By Joanna Glasner. 
Jan. 30, 2002
"Everything crashed at once," Global Crossing's CFO says -- this week it became the largest telecom firm ever to file for bankruptcy protection in the U.S. Jan. 30, 2002 New Internet domain ".coop" opens for registration.
Also: ViaCell files an IPO to raise $115 million....
EU prepares to clear the $23.1 billion merger of Hewlett-Packard with Compaq Computer without requiring divestments.... and more. 
Jan. 30, 2002
The SEC goes after online investment fraud with a little fraud of its own -- hoax websites lying in wait to trip up naive consumers.
March 30, 2001
A hacker claims he managed to crack into a company's purportedly impenetrable security system.
But the OpenHack III organizers say it was too little, too late.
Still, the guy's getting a job interview out of it.
By Michelle Delio. 
March 30, 2001
A new hole in Internet Explorer could allow a malicious hacker to take control of your computer simply by sending an e-mail with an attachment.
By Michelle Delio. 
March 30, 2001
The Argentinean who created the kit used to write the Anna Kournikova worm -- evidently fearing legal repercussions -- removes it from his website.
By Michelle Delio. 
March 28, 2001 More than 100,000 DSL customers look like they'll probably have to go through the experience (some say hassle, others say agony) of finding new service now that NorthPoint is going southbound.
By Joyce Slaton. 
March 27, 2001 Indians have been flocking to software engineering programs for years.
Now there's fear that nobody will be left to fill positions as chemical and electrical engineers.
Manu Joseph reports from Mumbai, India. 
March 23, 2001 Flat-rate plans for dialup Internet service, once all the rage in Europe, are proving to be unprofitable.
Inexpensive Net connections are only a dream.
As one observer says, "The situation in the U.S. is kind of like science-fiction for us."
Matt Hilburn reports from Madrid. 
March 23, 2001 Netmorf, a company that allowed users to access corporate databases and the Internet from any device, went out of business.
What does this mean for companies of its kind?
Elisa Batista reports from Las Vegas. 
March 22, 2001
The chipmaker releases a 1.3 GHz Athlon processor that it says is faster than Intel's best.
And a future AMD chip will not be compatible with Intel chips, in a deliberate strategy that could split the market.
John Gartner reports from CeBIT in Hannover, Germany. 
March 21, 2001 Just when you're getting comfortable with the idea of e-mail signatures, a Czech firm finds a bug in an OpenPGP format that allows an adversary who breaks into your computer to forge your e-mail signature.
Declan McCullagh reports from Washington. 
March 21, 2001 President Bush's first international trip was to Mexico.
Now Mexican President Vicente Fox makes his first official U.S. visit, and it starts Wednesday in Silicon Valley, not the White House.
Interesting.
By Julia Scheeres. 
March 20, 2001
An Australian man claims to have seen the final version of Apple's eagerly awaited operating system for the Mac.
He's reviewed it on his website, but fears of getting a nastygram from Apple compelled him to encode it with PGP.
By Leander Kahney. 
March 19, 2001
An alleged backdoor planted by the National Security Agency is the reason Germany's Defense Ministry is banning MS operating systems.
But a German official denies there's any ban, and MS has always denied the backdoor.
Steve Kettmann reports from Berlin. 
March 17, 2001 Texas is mulling over a public-private initiative to encourage students to choose majors in such fields as electrical engineering and computer science.
Other states already have such programs.
Courtney Barry reports from Austin, Texas. 
March 16, 2001 City officials are saying adios to Microsoft Windows and turning to the free open-source software because they'd rather spend money on social services than on software.
As Mayor Andr?s Manuel L?pez Obrador says, "for the good of all, the poor must come first."
By Julia Scheeres. 
March 15, 2001 South Africa's Econet has become the continent's third-largest Pan-African telecom operator, in large part because CEO Strive Masiyiwa doesn't listen when governments say no.
Nick Wachira reports from Nairobi, Kenya. 
March 13, 2001 Microsoft won't officially be distributing the applications suite for another month, but someone has already posted a copy online.
So much for those heightened security measures.
By Andy Patrizio. 
March 13, 2001
The hasty deal made between the Internet's official overseer and its top registry continues to be a source of contention among those attending ICANN's board meeting.
Stewart Taggart reports from Melbourne. 
March 13, 2001 MIT computer science honcho Michael Dertouzos wants technology to do away with the humdrum busy work that consumes our lives.
Until then, and only then, will we reap the promise of the technology revolution.
By Farhad Manjoo.
Glave, a former reporter and editor at Wired News, had unwittingly walked into Dollar's biometric experiment, which is being conducted at the agency's outposts in 13 airports across the country. 
"It's all about asset control," Jim Senese, Dollar's vice president of quality assurance, said. 
The vehicle rental industry is plagued by theft and credit card fraud, which often go hand in hand: Fake or stolen IDs and credit cards are used to rent vehicles, which are never returned. 
U-Haul has been thumbprinting clients in areas with high theft rates since the early 90s, said company spokeswoman Jennifer Flachman, who added that the prints are destroyed at the customer's request when the equipment is returned. 
At Dollar, the rental agreement forms -- and thumbprints -- are stored at the company's corporate headquarters in Tulsa, Oklahoma, for seven years before they are trashed. 
Senese said the system would benefit customers by keeping rental prices down.
The month-long pilot program, which concludes Dec. 1, has successfully reduced fraud and theft at the test locations, Senese said.
He refused to divulge the particulars of the test, which had been scheduled for rollout this month before the Sept. 11 attacks. 
Deterrence is a key feature of the system, he said. 
"If someone has a bad intention, they're going to go somewhere else," Senese said.
"It's kind of like being the one store in the mall that drug-tests new applicants -- people won't try to get work there if they have a drug problem." 
He was surprised to learn of Glave's reaction to the program, saying that thousands of Dollar customers have been thumbprinted in past weeks and the company has received few complaints. 
Privacy advocates say that the burgeoning use of biometric data -- including face and finger scans -- by government and corporations is poorly regulated and worry that information could be used to track and monitor citizens. 
"It's important not to be blindsided by these things," said Lauren Weinstein, the moderator of the Privacy Forum . 
In the climate of fear following the Sept. 11 attack, the public has been more willing to forfeit privacy for the promise of greater security, without considering the long-term consequences, Weinstein said. 
"How would you feel if you went to the grocery store, and you went to sign a check and they demanded a thumbprint?"
Weinstein said.
"Ten years from now they'll be demanding your DNA." 
The Dollar pilot program has been rolled out in the following airports:
Philadelphia International, Ronald Reagan Washington National, Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport, Chicago Midway, Detroit Metro, Baltimore/Washington International, Dallas Love Field, William P. Hobby Airport in Houston, San Diego International, Los Angeles International, San Francisco International, Denver International and Oakland International. 
"I don't think companies have any role collecting biometric data," Glave said.
"It takes us into a surveillance society that is profoundly disturbing.
What's next?
Am I going to have to be fingerprinted when I check into a hotel in case
I trash my room?
" 
"The only print of mine Dollar is going to get is the front side of my middle finger," Glave said. 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
"It's simply beautiful," said Elaine Busch, a graphic designer from San Francisco.
"I'm a PC person, but I think I'm going to get one." 
Tim Bajarin, president of market research firm Creative Strategies , and someone not inclined to hyperbole, predicted the new iMac will become the best-selling computer of all time. 
Bajarin predicted Apple will sell 12 million of the new machines in the next three years.
Over the last three years, Apple sold 6 million of the original iMacs, which makes it one of the best-selling computers ever. 
"Apple has another hit on its hands," Bajaran said. 
"The new iMac is an excellent product, in our opinion, and Apple may have scored a hit with its design," echoed Merrill Lynch analyst Steven Fortuna in a note to investors.
"Unlike the failed G4 Cube, the new iMac is affordable ($1,299 to $1,799) and aimed at a clear target audience (consumers)." 
At first, Macworld attendees didn't appear to warm to the machine's radical design.
When Apple's CEO Steve Jobs revealed the machine during his keynote speech on Monday, the applause was polite but muted.
You could almost hear a collective "huh?" from the crowd. 
But after Jobs showed off some of its features and played a short introductory video, the crowd really began to warm to the new iMac's simple yet unfamiliar design. 
"People really seem to like it," said the machine's designer Jonathan Ive, who was walking the Macworld show floor on Tuesday.
"I'm so glad.
I wasn't sure they would." 
Ive agreed that people took a little time to warm to the machine, with its circular base and angle-poise mounted LCD screen.
He said it was as though people needed a little time to familiarize themselves with the unfamiliar.
Ive said the design was really very logical, but took quite a long time to figure out because nothing like it had been imagined before.
It wasn't until after it had been created that it became obvious that was the way it should be. 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
The interactive, Web-based map catalogs most of the 2,400 cameras filming public space in the city, including cameras on buildings, ATMs and traffic lights. 
Users log on to the iSee website, select a point of departure and a destination, and a dotted line sketches a route around closed-circuit cameras marked as red boxes.
Camera coverage is so dense that the island of Manhattan looks like a red chili pepper. 
"We've designed iSee to be useful to a wide range of ordinary people," said an IAA operative who declined to be identified.
"The demonstrated tendency of Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) operators to single out ethnic minorities for observation and to voyeuristically focus on women's breasts and buttocks provides the majority of the population ample legitimate reasons to avoid public surveillance cameras." 
The IAA operative also noted the proliferation of spy-cam websites, and increasing commercial incentives for distributing CCTV footage to reality-based media shows like Cops and America's Funniest Home Videos. plans to expand iSee to cover Seattle, Chicago and perhaps London, which, after years of being plagued by terrorism, is one of the most camera-saturated cities in the world. 
But like water's path of least resistance, a travelers' "path of least surveillance" can be so circuitous it transforms a walk of several blocks into an odyssey of miles.
It's doubtful iSee will replace the morning traffic reports.
So who is it for? 
Obviously, political activists who'd like to post flyers, paint graffiti messages or commit other acts of covert civil disobedience are likely to log onto iSee.
Although the iSee icon features a man with a bomb for a head (an unfortunate joke predating Sept. 11), the IAA doesn't think terrorists will see much value in iSee.
Most of them will be long gone before the feeds from cameras can be used against them. 
"CCTV isn't much of a threat to terrorists," the IAA operative said.
"While CCTV systems can help police reconstruct events after an incident, CCTV is not terribly effective either in preventing attacks or in identifying suspects.
As a result, terrorists spend remarkably little time worrying about the locations of surveillance cameras." 
In other words, it's everyday employees and spouses, not the Mohammed Attas of the world, who fear the cameras. 
But Alex Mathieson, marketing manager for video systems at Sensormatic Electronics , a fire and security company, said iSee is "inappropriate." 
He suggested privacy zealots "should stay at home." 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
The all-in-one media player has been successfully implemented on a small scale by Yahoo, but the RealOne Player marks a dramatic shift at RealNetworks.
Until now, the Seattle, Washington, company has only delivered stand-alone audio and video players. 
In fact, RealNetworks had been one of the few companies to promote the notion that consumers wanted to watch video files with one player and listen to audio files with another. 
"The world of Internet media has been more separate until now," said Dave Richards, RealNetworks' vice president of consumer systems.
"With broadband, that has all changed.
With the interactive mode coming with the help of broadband, media content is going to be more compelling." 
Other companies have been multi-tasking for a while now --just not to the extent of the RealOne Player. 
Microsoft 's Windows Media player has long had the capability of playing audio and video together.
Yahoo's Finance Vision , a streaming show about money and the stock market, is webcast through a three-frame system.
And the video component of the RealOne Player has the look and feel of the Macintosh QuickTime player. 
The Musicmatch audio player, which offers personalized music services, has been closing the gap between RealNetworks and Microsoft's Windows Media.
In the first quarter of this year, Musicmatch increased its customer base by nearly 30 percent, according to Jupiter Media Metrix . 
Even Microsoft's Windows Media is threatening RealNetwork's dominance.
Over the last year Windows Media has added 6.9 million home users, according to Jupiter Media Metrix. 
While RealNetworks continues to maintain a wide edge in consumer usage, clearly it had to change its philosophy if it was to continue to stay one step ahead of the competition.
But the RealOne Player is not merely a cobbled-together version of its competition; the new player has a few new features of its own. 
The RealOne Player will be the first to offer access to all of the major audio and video formats -- Microsoft, Real and MP3s -- so consumers no longer have to worry that a file they have downloaded won't play. 
It has the ability to bookmark hyperlinks to video and audio streams as well.
Most player applications allow users to store audio and video files, but not hyperlinks. 
With downloaded music and video files archived alongside hyperlinks from websites that house streamed content, the line between streaming and downloading is beginning to blur.
Users no longer have to use space on their hard drives to store files.
Instead, they can save links to websites from which audio and video can be streamed. 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
That's the impression one gets this week, when the market for initial public offerings swings back into action with offerings from three companies.
The burst of activity, although comparatively tame compared to the excesses of early 2000, makes this one of the busier weeks of the year for IPOs. 
This time around, however, the biggest deals on the agenda aren't coming from fresh-faced startups with high-flying plans for future profits.
The two largest offerings of the week, Instinet and Global Power Exchange, are both profitable companies that were around long before the Internet ever became a household buzzword. 
They're able to go public at a time when few others are able to generate much interest from investors. 
"Perhaps the investment banking world's strategy is if we can't bring public new companies, we'll just take the old companies and put them out in some shape or fashion to get the deals done," said Richard Peterson, market strategist at Thompson Financial.
He says investors who were burned by high-flying stocks last year are looking for companies whose performance in the real world can support their stock market valuations. 
That's not to say that newer tech companies have been entirely banished from the lineup.
This week's IPO calendar, for example, includes an offering from Tellium , a maker of optical switches that was founded in 1997.
And two weeks ago, Simplex Solutions, which develops technology for producing chips, saw its stock soar more than 70 percent in first-day trading. 
But those deals are increasingly the exception, rather than the rule, said Peterson, who believes "new economy" companies will continue to have a harder time getting new cash. 
"In the near term, it's going to be the old economy: oil and gas, real estate, insurance," Peterson said.
Maybe a touch of high finance, too. 
The fact that any companies are going public is cause for some optimism, said Irv DeGraw, director of research at WorldFinanceNet .
He believes the market for IPOs is finally showing sings of "fighting its way back." 
All that's left to see this week is whether investors will bite. 
DeGraw says it's virtually certain traders will flock to Instinet Group , the Reuters-owned electronic stock-trading business that is looking to raise up to $398 million in an offering next week.
Besides being a well-known name among investors, Instinet has a history of profits and steady growth. 
Another popular pick is probably Global Power Equipment, a Tulsa, Oklahoma company that makes equipment for gas turbine power plants.
Like Instinet, Global Power has also been around for decades and has a history of profits.
The company should also benefit from investors' recent enthusiasm for energy-related stocks. 
DeGraw is less optimistic about the youngest IPO candidate of the week, Tellium, a networking firm that he calls "a throwback to the dot-com mania era.
" The company, which has an accumulated debt of $206 million, is looking to raise up to $112 million in its IPO. 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
"Privacy practices and policies in corporate America have been steadily getting worse over the last couple of years," said Jason Catlett, president of Junkbusters, an independent privacy advocacy and consulting firm.
Just last week Yahoo ( YHOO ) followed in the steps of eBay ( EBAY ) and Amazon ( AMZN ) in changing its privacy policies to allow for greater use of the data, Catlett said.
Now, Yahoo can more easily send spam e-mail and make telemarketing calls while forcing customers to manually change their privacy preferences if they don't want that, he said.
Legal actions seem to be prompting somewhat better behavior.
To settle federal and state class action lawsuits, Internet advertiser DoubleClick ( DCLK ) in March agreed to adhere to an enhanced privacy policy, as well as pay $1.8 million in legal fees.
Internet consumers still rate online privacy as one of their top issues, said Marc Rotenberg, executive director of the Electronic Privacy Information Center.
"We see it in opinion polls, that people are concerned about what happens to personal information when they visit a website," he said.
To assuage those concerns, corporations can use IBM's ( IBM ) Tivoli Privacy Wizard, said Arvind Krishna, vice president of IBM's Tivoli Security Products division.
The software transforms a company's written privacy policies into electronic guidelines that can be used to prevent employees from violating the rules, he said.
For example, the software can prevent an employee from using a customer's home address information for anything besides shipping a product, Krishna said.
Meanwhile, AT&T's ( T )
Privacy Bird software allows people to set privacy preferences so that they get visual and audio cues when they visit websites that meet, beat or fall short of their privacy preferences.
Rotenberg said that while such software may help companies comply with their privacy policies and help consumers better identify privacy policies of websites, they won't actually do anything to expand individuals' privacy protections.
"Consumers want the ability to surf anonymously, to limit the collection of their information and to see that information when it is collected by others," Rotenberg said.
Software such as that from IBM, "is basically automating privacy policies, which currently can be read on websites, and which many people find frustrating and that change too frequently," he added.
Catlett agreed, saying that "encoding policies in readable form won't make much difference at all."
's
software "may help reduce the all-too-frequent accidents in privacy (lapses), but it won't deter the deliberate privacy violations," Catlett added.
Krishna countered that the software may not solve all privacy problems, but at least it may motivate corporations to improve their practices.
"The reason people don't implement desirable policies is because they are afraid of the cost," he said.
"If you offer automation and a way to implement sophisticated policies at a reasonable cost then they'll do so."
In January, Montreal-based Zero-Knowledge Systems and the Privacy Council released corporate privacy software of their own, with the Privacy Council's offering being free.
Last month, the conservative, think-tank Progress and Freedom Foundation released a study that found that commercial websites were gradually collecting less personal data from people and giving them more control over how the information is used.
However, Catlett and other experts attributed that finding to the fact that there are fewer dot-com companies around to violate the privacy of Web surfers.
's software is available for download , as is AT&T's software . 
Printing?
Use this version.
Like millions of young children, Terrel grew up playing arcade games and dreamed of owning one.
New machines cost thousands of dollars, way out of the range for most 24-year-olds.
Instead, he decided to build his own. 
He tracked down a guy in Cotati, California, who had a broken Pac-Man game he sold for $250.
Once he had the game, Terrel spent the next few months scouring eBay and other Internet websites for a new monitor and control panel. 
When he got his parts, he gutted the game.
He ripped the game's hard drive and joysticks out, and replaced them.
He loaded the new hard drive with Atari games like Frogger and Defender.
He mounted the motherboard under the monitor and turned on his sit-down, Atari 2600 arcade game. 
"You can buy something nicer than this, but building it is half the fun," said Terrel.
"This would probably run Nintendo games as well, but this is really for old school.
They have the cool new version of Frogger in arcades, but they don't have the old school one." 
To many, Terrel's journey seems odd.
Yet thousands of people do it each year.
There's even a Video Arcade Preservation Society , a collection of enthusiasts who share news with each other.
Fred Thornbury built a business helping these people.
His company AMDG Amusements builds and sells parts for damaged and out-of-service games.
Coming by parts isn't easy, though, so he has a team scattered around the country looking for old motherboards, games and control panels.
AMDG's five-person team uses those parts to create customized games. 
Most of AMDG's business comes from arcade owners who want to fix their inventory.
That demographic changes each October, he said.
"During the end of the year, it takes a little longer to make the games because women will order these for their husbands," said Thornbury.
"Most people want us to build new tables because they don't want something that smells like a bar and they want to match it to their house and game room." 
The arcade business is doing so well, Bob Sokol's company Two Bit Score manufactures parts for just three games: Pac-Man, Ms. Pac-Man and Galaga.
He still repairs pinball machines on occasion, but these days, arcade games are back in style.
He's serviced games for 10,000 people in the last 20 years, mainly providing new glass monitor covers or worn out control panels. 
Business really picked up in the mid-'90s thanks to the Internet, Sokol said.
People who owned broken games that languished in their garages and basements could fix up their prized possessions quickly and cheaply. 
Around the same time, a group of software developers began working the Multiple Arcade Machine Emulator.
The nonprofit MAME project was started in 1996 by Nicola Salmoria to preserve old video games.
The open-source software relies on unpaid programmers creating replicas of old arcade games in their spare time.
The emulators can easily be loaded onto a rebuilt arcade motherboard, turning Ms. Pac-Man into its own mini-arcade. 
Game companies look down upon people distributing copyrighted titles and Sokol ran afoul of Namco, the company that licenses Pac-Man, for manufacturing parts without a license.
Despite the troubles, game players have continued to build the better arcade. 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
Developed by a Korean company, Taff System , the game was received enthusiastically at the Tokyo Game Show last year.
Taff System recently signed a deal to distribute 200 Boong-Ga Boong-Ga machines in arcades all around Japan. 
Boong-Ga Boong-Ga leaves little to the imagination.
Players can choose between eight tushy targets, including "ex-girlfriend," "ex-boyfriend," "golddigger," and "prostitute."
Other characters include "mother-in-law," "child molester" and "con man." 
"This is a fun game of spanking the people who make your life miserable," advertises a badly translated brochure .
"When you spank the character that you choose to punish, the face expression of the character will change as they scream and twitch in pain.
The funny face expressions will make people laugh and relieve the stress." 
The player is not expected to spank the protruding bottom exactly, but to poke it enthusiastically with the attached plastic finger.
On the screen, the character's face grimaces and screams with each finger thrust.
The harder a player pokes the rear end, the higher his or her virility is rated.
At the end of the game, the machine prints out a card explaining the player's "sexual behavior." 
Taff promotes Boong-Ga Boong-Ga as a safe outlet for players' pent-up frustrations.
Academics and politicians have often blamed video games, rock music and TV for promoting everything from obesity to mass murder.
But although female straphangers in the Tokyo subway system are often groped and pinched, it may be a stretch to reproach Boong-Ga Boong-Ga and similar games for causing such sexual assaults. 
"If enough games and media sources show a behavior as being funny or acceptable, then it can encourage that behavior," said Kathryn Wright, a psychologist in Raleigh, North Carolina, who consults at WomenGamers.com .
"On the other hand, it depends on the individual.
I think there are a lot of young boys who can play a game like (Boong-ga, Boong-ga), and know that it's not appropriate to go out into public and start pinching and poking people." 
Jack Morin, author of a sex manual, Anal Pleasure and Health, agreed.
"Obsessions generally occur in response to intense prohibitions, which give the forbidden object heightened significance," he said.
"The prohibitions work both ways.
They encourage some people to 'tune out' the forbidden area or activity, while others get obsessed about it.
Sometimes you see both reactions within the same person -- and perhaps within the same culture as well." 
In Japan, "Azeme," or "anal attacks," are a popular menu item in Japanese brothels, pink parlors and massage joints. 
"Almost all of these acts involving the female sex worker 'attacking' the male client's prostate with (their) fingers and other objects," said Katharine Gates, author of Deviant Desires, Incredibly Strange Sex . 
Another game for the PC, Chimgam , which was developed by a Korean company, features a squatting character who emits big, swirly poops.
Players dodge the stools and shoot finger-like projectiles at the offending orifice. 
But while Chimgam certainly qualifies as asexual -- part of the Asian culture of cute -- Boong-Ga Boong-Ga is clearly a taboo buster. 
Boong-Ga Boong-Ga has been arousing the prurient interests of a few young men on the Net, but it seems unlikely to penetrate the American market.
Its anal theme seems to cause some Westerners to tighten their sphincters. 
"I'm sure that there are some guys and girls out there who enjoy buttocks, and in select company I might play Boong-Ga Boong-Ga," says Alison (last name withheld), a former Carnegie Mellon University psychology student.
"But as a console or PC game
it's probably not something I would buy." 
Alison is the subject of Pantscam , part of a Carnegie Mellon student website that also includes a discussion of Boong-Ga Boong-Ga. 
For Pantscam, Alison stuffed a camera inside her pants and broadcast live pictures to the Internet, using Wi-Fi wireless connections on the Carnegie Mellon campus.
Yet she never saw the site as sexually suggestive. 
"Pantscam is completely non-sexual, though people may infer sexual undertones, since the camera is in my pants," Alison said. 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
Andrew Dusing, a 25-year-old computer technician who lives in upstate New York, has fashioned chairs, tables and other furniture out of dozen Apple boxes and their Styrofoam inserts. 
Dusing, who works in the graphics department of Cazenovia College , recently outfitted one of the college's computer labs with dozens of new Apple machines.
When he finished setting up the computers, he couldn't bear to part with the boxes. 
"I really didn't want to throw them away," he said.
"So I made furniture out of them.
Sure, it saves money
but it's because I really like to do it.
It's about thinking different.
What could I make today?" 
Dusing turned the boxes into a dining table, a set of chairs and some CD racks.
He even made a couch. 
"You can sit on it," he said, "but it's not all that comfortable." 
To further show off his packing material passion, Dusing made a pair of giant, bulky animal sculptures -?
a sofa-sized rhino and a giraffe that stands 6 feet tall. 
"I wanted to make some animals whose coloring reflected the pictures on the boxes," he said.
"The boxes were turquoise and blue and white.
I used those elements to my advantage." 
Dusing made the giraffe out of packing tape and Elmer's glue; but as a result, it's starting to fall apart.
The rhino is made from dry wall screws and industrial-strength epoxy glue. 
Dusing designed them by drawing a silhouette of the animal and dividing it into geometric shapes -?
triangles, rectangles and squares, which could be made out of cardboard. 
Dusing was inspired by the huge topiary sculptures at Walt Disney World in Florida and originally planned to put the cardboard animals in his mother's front garden. 
"The neighbors have all these dopey ornaments on their lawns," he said.
"But my mom wasn't too keen on having these giant lawn ornaments." 
The sculptures were exhibited at an art show at the college and received a positive response.
One attendee suggested Dusing could sell them on eBay for $5,000 apiece, but he opted to keep them, despite the tight quarters in his apartment. 
Dusing plans to make more animal sculptures, perhaps an elephant or a gorilla.
He is also hoping to get his hands on some old Apple boxes from the 1980s that featured the rainbow-colored Apple logo. 
If he gets enough of the old boxes, he'll make a '57 Chevy out of them.
"They're classic boxes so why not make a classic car?" he said. 
Dusing also wants to make more furniture.
He needs a rack for his collection of videocassettes.
"I'll never need to buy furniture again," he said.
"Whenever a need arises, I know I can make it out of cardboard.
I just wish I had more boxes." 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
"The Postal Service is facing an unprecedented threat," said Rep. Henry A. Waxman (D-California), the ranking minority member of the committee.
"Bioterrorists are poisoning innocent Americans with anthrax by taking advantage of the anonymity of the mail." 
Waxman is proposing the implementation of a two-dimensional barcode "stamp" that would contain the sender's identity as well as the date, time and place the postage was paid.
The technology is currently used by companies that provide Internet mailing services, such as Stamps.com . 
He said the particulars of the proposal -? including costs and the effect on stamp machines -? still need to be hashed out. 
A Postal Service spokesman refused to comment on the tracking proposal but allowed that the agency was "aggressively looking at virtually everything that's out there" to increase security.
He added that mail-sorting technologies -?
such as barcodes -- can be implemented unilaterally by the USPS without congressional approval. 
The USPS responded to the anthrax attacks by irradiating mail, but Waxman and others say the method is insufficient.
Because irradiation equipment is costly, it has only been dispatched to a few undisclosed postal service facilities.
The bulk of the 680 million pieces of mail delivered each day by the USPS is not sanitized. 
Irradiation, which consists of bombarding objects with high energy electrons that break up the bacteria's DNA and kill it is routinely used to sterilize food products such as meat. 
But the process can also destroy the mail - earlier this month, 90 lbs.
of envelopes and magazines burst into flames at a New Jersey postal facility when the material overheated.
Irradiation also harms electronics, exposes film and weakens prescription drugs, said Maynard H. Benjamin, president of the Envelope Manufacturers Association , a trade group representing the makers of 93 percent of the envelopes manufactured and distributed in North America. 
Benjamin, who attended closed-door meetings with the USPS and Waxman this month, has suggested the agency consider "fiber fingerprinting," which identifies correspondence by the unique characteristics possessed by each piece of paper. 
But the ultimate goal of any technology adopted by the USPS should be to identify the people sending mail, he said. 
"If you look at Federal Express or UPS, the reason there have been minimum successful threats to them is that everything they have is traceable and trackable," Benjamin said. 
Privacy advocates say that traceable mail would stifle whistle-blowers and government critics.
Furthermore, they argue, the system could backfire. 
"You'll have the same fraudulent problems that you have with IDs and credit cards now," said Lauren Weinstein, the moderator of the Privacy Forum .
"The bottom line is that the bad guys are going to find a away around it.
What if they steal your stamps, and you get framed for something you didn't send?" 
Weinstein said that proposal could further harm the precarious financial health of the USPS, by pushing more consumers to opt for e-mail over snail mail. 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
After securing state funds for the project, Maine selected Apple to equip all seventh and eighth grade students and teachers in the state with 36,000 iBooks.
The program begins this fall. 
S.A.D. #4 got a head start using laptops when a local manufacturing company, Guilford of Maine , was inspired by Governor King's proposal and offered to help supply their district with the computers. 
The program has been very successful, after some initial hurdles. 
"The summer of 2000 was very stressful for teachers because they weren't sure what they were going to do with the laptops and how it would work," Priest said.
Now, "teachers are much more relaxed.
People in this building would be really upset if they had to give up their laptops." 
Staff development over the summer, a paid three-day "boot camp," and after-school re-certification classes all helped teachers learn to use the technology and integrate it into their courses.
Support from the administration and the community was also essential, Priest said. 
Now, the Piscataquis Community Middle School ?
- which serves 280 kids in grades five through eight -- is a wireless network.
All eighth graders and teachers have a laptop, and extras are available for other grades to share. 
"It's opened up the whole world for us," Priest said.
"We're in the middle of nowhere.
We can't just hop on the bus and go 15 miles down the road to a museum." 
Instead, students can take virtual field trips.
They can read about a historical event ?
- typically condensed into one paragraph in their social studies textbook -- then get on the Web and see the actual battlefield where the event occurred, read newspaper coverage, among other materials.
A site on Gettysburg is one of the governor's favorite examples. 
While Priest is excited about the statewide plan, she's also realistic about the challenges ahead. 
"You can't move thirty-odd thousand laptops to 240 buildings built in 240 different ways without there being some glitches," Priest said. 
The state is already making preparations for the transition. 
At the end of February, nine schools ?- one in each region of the state -- will have one-to-one computer access that will serve as demonstration sites. 
Each of the 241 middle schools will select a lead teacher to serve as a liaison to the department of education to help assess their staff needs and professional development.
Those teachers will get their computers first. 
The state has also received a $1 million grant from the Gates Foundation for teacher training and professional development. 
Governor King admitted the change will be difficult for some: "We're basically asking teachers to fundamentally re-think how they present the material." 
"Change is not easy for anybody.
The reaction I've been hearing from the education community is equally divided between enthusiasm and some anxiety ?- and it's not surprising," he said.
"In many ways this is uncharted territory.
Nobody's ever done it on this scale before." 
Thought daunting, it's an idea whose time has come, Maine educators say. 
"We've been working for a number of years with the computer lab model.
That model is almost self-defeating," said John Lunt, the technology coordinator at Freeport Middle School and president of the Association of Computer Technology Educators of Maine.
"As more teachers were interested in computers, it became harder to get lab time. 
"If you can't get in to use the resource, you decide to use something else.
Teachers reverted back to the older ways without technology." 
A computer lab "doesn't fundamentally change the role of technology in teaching and learning," said Yellow Light Breen, a spokesman for the Maine Department of Education.
"It takes one-to-one access to make it a universal teaching tool, just like a pencil and paper." 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
April 10, 2001 U.S. District Judge Marilyn Hall Patel is nearing the end of her rope with the file-trading service's attempts at filtering out copyrighted material.
"Maybe the system needs to be shut down," Patel says.
Brad King reports from a heated courtroom in San Francisco. 
April 10, 2001 MP3.com thought it had caught a break last Friday when it was asked to pay just $300,000 in a copyright infringement trial.
Jury members over the weekend admit they wanted a much higher award but had problems doing the math.
By Brad King. 
April 10, 2001 Universal's deal to buy EMusic is seen as good and bad by the labels who had deals with EMusic.
The concern for some is that it will have artists singing the blues.
By Jeffrey Terraciano. 
April 10, 2001 Subscription models are making a comeback -- only this time, the entertainment won't just stay on your computer.
Convergence is coming, and it's going to cost you.
By Brad King. 
April 6, 2001
A jury awards TVT Records the minimum penalty in a copyright infringement case against MP3.com.
But the music site hopes to win an appeals decision that could make it easier to run a music locker service.
By Brad King. 
April 6, 2001
Napster use goes global, raising the stakes in the copyright protection fight going on in America.
Regardless of the outcome, the record labels are probably going to be OK.
Also: Listen.com's new plan ...
MoodLogic's smart search.
By Brad King. 
April 5, 2001
The biggest portal site will begin offering a subscription music service this summer with the help of two major labels.
Although the labels finally seem committed to licensing content they are shutting out traditional retailers.
By Brad King. 
April 4, 2001 MTV gets into the digital download business, as it begins selling 10,000 tracks from all five of the major labels.
With plans to integrate its online retailers with its television name brand, MTV becomes the most powerful online music presence.
By Brad King. 
April 4, 2001
Two powerful trade organizations are set to take on the recording industry, reluctantly picking up the fight for digital rights where Napster has failed.
By Brad King. 
April 3, 2001 Napster faithful gathered for a rally one day before the Senate opens hearings that could help determine the future of digital distribution.
Ryan Sager reports from Washington. 
April 3, 2001
It's not just Sen. Orrin Hatch and Napster ganging up on the recording industry.
Retailers and security companies have joined in the fight for the right to distribute digital music.
Tuesday's Senate hearing should be a download of fun.
By Brad King. 
April 2, 2001 Three major record labels announce a partnership with RealNetworks to launch a music subscription service.
This comes on the eve of a high-profile Senate hearing that will examine what some have deemed unfair practices by the recording industry.
By Brad King.
This approach works, but it is expensive.
An original model Aibo costs about $1,500, although new models like " Latte " are selling for just under $1,000. 
Enter the upstart B.I.O. Mechanical Bugs from Hasbro, which hit toy stores in September and sell for $40.
Fans and experts say these can herd, feed, flee, fight and even learn on their own, and seem every bit as lifelike as Sony's far pricier mechanical hound. 
Christopher Byrne, a toy expert, is impressed with the technological sophistication of the toys, which he found to be "more fun" than the Aibo. 
"They're wired to learn," Byrne said.
"You can put it in a box, and it can be stymied, then learn to climb out, and it will remember the next time." 
He expects the bugs to be especially popular with young boys, combining their penchant for bugs, robots and battle.
"It's really cool to get (the bugs) to battle each other," he said. 
Unlike Aibo , the B.I.O. bugs don't rely on a big computer brain to function.
Although the bug-bots do use some simple computer chips, their design is actually based on robots that use only basic electronic circuitry to create "nervous networks" that can behave in very lifelike ways.
In short, their genius lies in the body, and not the brain. 
Mark Tilden designed the toys based on his 10 years of work as a roboticist and physicist with the federal lab in Los Alamos, New Mexico.
One of his projects was building robots that could explore the surface of Mars for NASA. 
The key to Tilden's approach is shedding the notion that a good robot needs a powerful central processor -- a "brain" -- like humans have. 
"Ninety-nine percent of creatures on this planet do very well without a brain at all," Tilden said.
"I've tapped in to how they do that." 
Tilden is not the only one eschewing digital technology as the key to making artificially intelligent robots.
Over the past 15 years, other roboticists have built very effective robots that don't require a motherboard or a hard drive. 
Rodney Brooks , of the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory at MIT, is well known as the pioneer of this simpler approach, which he calls "behavior-based" robotics. 
When he constructed his first behavior-based robot 15 years ago, Brooks' colleagues thought it was, literally, too stupid to be worth much.
"I didn't have heaps of mathematical logic," he said.
"They thought it couldn't be respectable." 
The robot, named Gingus, was a six-legged walker.
Each leg was operated by a simple, independent circuit connected to a sensor on the foot.
When the sensor was on the ground, the circuit would instruct the leg to push down and back; when in the air, to kick forward, and so on. 
With each leg working independently, Gingus was able to climb over things, and navigate through a crowd, and do it quickly.
It took Gingus only seconds to do what its computer-based, big-brained rivals took 15 minutes of "thinking" to achieve, Brooks said. 
"The traditional AI system tries to extract info from the world, model it, then cope in it," Brooks said, "whereas behavioral systems react to the world itself." 
Tilden said this direct link to the world is what gives his bug toys their lifelike reaction to each other, people and the world, and makes them so much fun. 
"The cool thing about my devices is that they do what they do by themselves," Tilden said.
"They have more interactive responsibility than an Aibo.
If you ignore it, it gives a death scream.
If you attack the bug, it will respond to you, based on how you play with it." 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
Under the proposal made public last week, Microsoft and some plaintiffs agreed the company would provide more than $1 billion worth of Microsoft software, refurbished personal computers and other resources to more than 12,500 of the nation's poorest schools. 
Critics contend the proposal will only serve to enhance Microsoft's competitive advantage in schools while doing little to meet the poorest schools' extensive needs. 
Both sides were in court Tuesday to argue the settlement's merits before U.S. District Judge J. Frederick Motz in Baltimore. 
Motz told a courtroom filled with more than 100 spectators, many of them lawyers involved in the case, that he did not know how he might rule. 
"I have no idea what I am going to do," Motz said.
"I want to hear from everybody." 
Some lawyers who attended Tuesday's hearing, including the lead counsel for plaintiffs in California, have objected to the settlement, calling it inadequate. 
And Apple, long the leader in educational computers and software, filed a brief arguing that the settlement would only further Microsoft's monopoly power, the concern that prompted the lawsuits in the first place. 
Microsoft and Apple, once fierce rivals, have been on relatively friendly terms since 1997, when Microsoft made a $150 million investment in its rival to help keep Apple afloat. 
Nonetheless, analyst Rob Enderle of Giga Information Systems said he wasn't surprised by Apple's strong criticism of the deal. "
Apple is clearly the company that could be the most damaged" by the proposal, he said. 
Michael Hausfeld, one of the plaintiffs' lawyers in favor of the settlement, said it would help close the "digital divide" -- the gap between affluent students, who generally have easy access to technology, and poor students, who do not. 
Hausfeld said if consumers pursued their claim against Microsoft and eventually won the case, they would stand to recover as little as $6 each, before court costs were deducted. 
"We clearly have a choice: We can spend several years, and a great deal of money, fighting the private antitrust cases in the courts for a few dollars benefit per claimant, or we can force Microsoft to assist economically challenged children now," Hausfeld said. 
A growing group of educators are questioning whether the proposal as it stands will truly meet the schools' needs, though. 
"States, districts and schools have spent a lot of time over the last five years creating technology plans," said Helen Soule, director of technology for the state of Mississippi. 
"I would much rather that they be able to implement those plans with some sort of Microsoft funding, rather than be given specific things that they don't necessarily need," Soule said. 
Microsoft said the deal allows schools to choose to spend money on training and resources for non-Microsoft products.
But the company concedes that those who go with Microsoft products will be given more resources, such as free software. 
"The actual settlement is made up of a basket of resources," said Mark East, worldwide general manager of Microsoft's education solutions group.
"The software component is just one of the elements." 
The settlement hearings come as Microsoft continues to attempt to reach a deal with nine states seeking a remedy against the software giant for violating antitrust laws. 
The Justice Department and nine other state attorneys general moved earlier this month to settle the lawsuit after Microsoft agreed to new provisions aimed at ensuring that competitors can build software products that work seamlessly with its Windows operating system. 
But Connecticut Attorney General Richard Blumenthal became the latest official to back away from the proposed deal, saying on Tuesday that it "has too many gaps and ambiguities." 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
Meanwhile, Treo (pronounced with a long "e") communicators are combination personal digital assistants, text pager and cell phone devices by Handspring that aren't on the market yet.
The Treo 180 communicator comes out early in 2002 and will sell for $399 in stores.
The Treo 270, which comes with a full-color screen, arrives in the middle of next year and will cost $599. 
Both companies acknowledged each other's existence, but deny any bad blood. 
Trademark attorneys, however, don't rule out a future legal rumble. 
Under federal trademark law, one of the companies could make the case that consumers were "confused" by the name on the package and bought their competitor's product instead, said Glenn Spencer Bacal, a trademark attorney in Phoenix, Arizona.
As for the accent marks and macrons the companies inserted to differentiate the products, in a courthouse that "won't carry a heck of a lot of weight because nobody is going to voice those accents in the marketplace," Bacal said. 
Bacal sees potential conflict: When a customer calls a Best Buy and asks if the store carries "Treos," how will the clerk respond?
Will the clerk know which Treo the customer is referring to? 
Other attorneys echoed Bacal, who called Handspring's and e.
Digital's decisions to sell products with the same name a "minefield." 
"The law says a trademark is considered an infringing trademark if there is a likelihood of confusion," said Daniel Kirshner, a trademark attorney in East Brunswick, New Jersey.
"It sounds to me in this particular circumstance the trademark is identical.
It sounds like they're fairly related goods and services." 
Neither company has raised the issue in a courthouse.
But if either one of them did, which would a judge say owns the right to call a product Treo? 
It isn't clear.
Both Handspring and Hy-Tek Manufacturing, the company originally poised to bring the Tre? player to market, claim rights to the trademark "Treo." 
"I think the facts are the Treo name we have for our product was trademarked prior to Handspring," said Steve Ferguson, vice president of sales and marketing for e.
Digital Corporation. 
Hy-Tek Manufacturing, which decided not to promote the Tre?
player because it was late to market, filed an application for the trademark on Oct. 18, 2000, according to the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office .
Handspring didn't apply for the same trademark until Aug. 29, 2001. 
While Hy-Tek's earlier filing gives the company priority to the name, it doesn't mean the company can successfully sue Handspring, Bacal said. 
According to the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, both Hy-Tek's and Handspring's requests for the trademark Treo were "suspended," which means neither company was granted the name, Bacal said. 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
But the ruling didn't affect the Kazaa service after it was sold to Sharman Networks of Australia. 
The website showed dozens of downloads per minute, accumulating to more than 30 million in the year since the company was established. 
Whether Sharman could be liable for copyright infringement in the Netherlands wasn't certain.
Kazaa would normally have faced fines totaling as much as $40,000 a day, or a maximum of $800,000, after a Dutch court ruled in November that the company was violating copyright law. 
Because the shared files contain copyright-protected material, a lawsuit was lodged in the Netherlands by a music copyright protection agency, Buma/Stemra. 
Kazaa appealed the ruling, arguing that a Dutch court would not have jurisdiction to shut down the entire worldwide operating company.
Kazaa also said the court's order would mean the end of its business. 
But the Amsterdam court rejected the objections, saying the software enabled users from all over the world to download songs that are also copyright protected in the Netherlands. 
Unlike Napster, the Kazaa program is designed to work without a central server or distribution point, which could make it challenging for the music industry to shut down. 
Kazaa offers users a computer program which facilitates the exchange of text, images, videos and audio files between individual users on the Internet. 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
Television sets will shrink to flat screens.
Computers will fit into consumers' hands.
Seamless Internet connection will happen from clothes, the car and the home. 
While devices continue the trend toward sleeker and smaller, the gadgets will also communicate with each other as well as the Internet, and they will perform additional tasks. 
"There will be major trends, and one is the power of storage being smaller and more impacting," Fasold said.
"There will be different storage options -- for example, you could play hours and hours of music on the road and store those songs on a hard disk to listen to at home." 
Compaq, for example, will show its iPAQ Pocket PC taking photographs and making phone calls, doing much more than traditional PDA organizing tasks.
The computer manufacturer also plans to unveil a new line of desktop computers and notebooks that include options to surf the Web wirelessly using Bluetooth or the 802.11 Ethernet standard. 
"With the advent of wireless infrastructure becoming more mature in the U.S., the wireless mobility capability is now in our industry," said Compaq spokesman Roger Frizzell.
"That's where handhelds and devices come into play.
You still have customers in the enterprise space that want traditional (desktop computer) products, but they want the wireless feature in them.
From the consumer standpoint, one thing we'll be doing at CES is demonstrating that the Pocket PC can be a hub to connect to other digital devices." 
Even though the prices for desktop PCs have fallen dramatically to as low $400, Frizzell denied the home computer was a dying breed.
He said it was simply "evolving" to become more compact, yet more powerful. 
"It's a powerful tool that can do a lot more than just data access," he said. 
But Frizzell acknowledged that the flourishing handheld devices have colored the computing landscape.
The company's fastest growing computer the last two years has been the Compaq iPAQ , Frizzell said. 
So many people at the show are expected to tote devices such as the iPAQ that companies like Dockers and Scott eVest will be showing off clothing to accommodate the gadgets. 
"I haven't been (to CES) before," said Scott E. Jordan, chairman and CEO of Scott eVest, a manufacturer of vests with large seamless pockets.
"I expect to see a lot of miniature devices.
I expect to see a lot of mobile technology.
I view the vest as a computer box." 
Panasonic, OnStar and Microsoft will be combining all these wired and wireless devices with entertainment equipment in digital home showcases.
According to CEA's Fasold, consumers at the show will be able to "talk to the lighting with (their) home theater, which can also talk to the World Wide Web to download movies without having to talk to a PC." 
Microsoft's Bill Gates will kickstart CES Monday night with a demonstration of the AirPanel 150, a flat-panel wireless monitor from ViewSonic that allows users to carry it from room to room.
The machine lets users pop the display out of a docking station and carry it around for conference room presentations, Web surfing and viewing DVD movies running from the desktop PC. will run until Friday. 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
Feb. 26, 2001 Fashion insiders drool over the prospect of a having the scoop on a burgeoning trend.
Now online fashion forecasting may speed up that process.
But the old guard of the fashion world wonders if it will really make an impact on the industry.
By Robin Clewley. 
Feb. 23, 2001 Brazil's government is subsidizing a plan to develop stripped-down computers that will cost only $300.
Just another example of the country's aggressive attitude toward getting its people connected.
Paulo Reb lo reports from Recife, Brazil. 
Feb. 22, 2001
Next time you're out scuba diving
you may be able to strike up a conversation with a passing dolphin -- that is, so long as you've studied up on your whistle-speak.
By Louise Knapp. 
Feb. 20, 2001 Microsoft's Xbox, with its nVidia chip, is a virtual speed demon.
It's four times as fast as the best graphics chip on the market, and faster than what PCs might ever be able to do.
By Andy Patrizio. 
Feb. 16, 2001 Brian Hubert, winner of the 2001 Lemelson-MIT Student Prize for Inventiveness, is more than a part-time concert pianist and composer.
From potato chip bags as computer memory to gene chips as a diagnostic method, Hubert's ideas are on the cutting edge of scientific research.
By Mark K. Anderson.
The XP keynote kicked off with a rendition of "America The Beautiful" performed by a white-robed gospel choir gathered underneath a huge Windows XP banner.
What might have been obnoxious six weeks ago seemed appropriate at the Marriott Marquis in the heart of New York City. 
Gates and New York City Mayor Rudolph Giuliani took the stage shortly after and received standing ovations, which Gates said was presumably directed at the popular Guiliani. 
Giuliani made a short speech stating "we have emerged stronger, more confident in our ability to handle any disaster, and more convinced that we're right and they're wrong." 
Giuliani also thanked "Bill" for holding the XP launch in his town, and for donating software and computer systems after the attack.
The city's original emergency command center, located below ground in World Trade Center 7, was crushed when the Twin Towers collapsed.
A new command center was quickly built with donations from tech companies. 
"Without those donations, and without the technology, New York would not have been able to function," Giuliani said. 
Gates opened his keynote by noting that technology makes the impossible possible. 
He stressed security and privacy features of XP, and said it was a common-sense system that would act as a "platform to allow people to develop on top of it." 
Gates said the release of XP "marked the end of an era, the end of DOS and also the end of Windows 95.
" is the text-based system that powered Windows PCs, and still lurks underneath Windows 3.1, 95, 98 and Windows Me. 
Windows 95 was dismissed by Gates as an operating system whose day was done.
Windows 98 and Me, which received lukewarm receptions from the tech industry but are still in wide usage, got scant mention, but Windows 2000 was touted as the rock-solid framework that XP was built on. 
A clip of the launch of Windows 95 was shown, featuring Gates informing the crowd that he agreed with Apple's Jobs that Windows 3.1 was a "crummy operating system," and assuring the crowd that he'd soon say that about Windows 95. 
"And certainly our users have given us plenty of reasons to know that Windows 95 isn't good enough," Gates said. 
A DOS C: prompt, the opening screen for all the text-based DOS programs, appeared on a large TV screen, and Gates typed "Exit," the DOS command to shut down a system. 
As he prepared to hit "enter," a HAL-like robot voice pleaded with him not to shut DOS down, to which Gates responded, "They don't call your movie 2001 for nothing," and terminated the DOS program. 
Gates' introduction of Jim Allchin, vice president of Microsoft's platforms group that oversees Windows, included reminisces of Allchin chiding Gates about Microsoft's "unreliable, consumer operating systems" during his employment interview. 
"I told Bill I wanted to work with real operating systems," Allchin recalled, and then launched into the benefits of XP, touting the system's juxtaposition of the "high-end, power-user Windows 2000 features, and consumer friendly Windows Me components." 
Regis Philbin took the stage and confessed that he was computer illiterate. 
Philbin then put Gates in the Who Wants
To Be A Millionaire hot seat, asking him if it was worth his time to answer questions to earn a "mere million.
" 
"Well, actually I don't know," smiled Gates, who went on to answer a few questions about Windows XP, managing to respond without polling the audience or calling a lifeline. 
Gates then said he was going out for a walk around Times Square, leaving Philbin on stage to learn how to use XP.
Philbin noted that Gates would probably enjoy meeting "the naked cowboys and hot dog vendors" that Philbin seems to think populate Times Square. 
Gates later "beamed back" into the keynote from a local Starbucks, where he sipped hot chocolate and chatted with former NYC Mayor Ed Koch.
Gates soon moved on to the Times Square Virgin music store where he chatted with Dick Clark and then danced with a heavily tattooed man who complimented Gates on his haircut. 
When Philbin lost contact with Gates via XP's instant messenger video application, Philbin ad-libbed that Gates had probably run off with his new tattooed friend. 
At that point, an assistant was sent out with a backup camera and quickly located the wayward billionaire, who was standing alone in the midst of the bustle of Times Square, looking very happy. 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
"Current slowdowns in broadband proliferation have likely forced anyone who'd planned to build a business on streaming video to drastically scale back growth projections," said Ric Dube, senior analyst with Webnoize , an Internet research firm.
"Nobody will ever pay for streaming video content at speeds below broadband. "Cable television's quality and price set standard expectations.
Whether or not speed is there, pay services compete with quality control, customer service, price and selection.
" 
No fewer than four subscription services -- operated by Internet media companies, the five major record labels and the movie studios -- are slated to launch before the end of the year, bringing unprecedented popular content to users for monthly fees. 
MusicNet and Pressplay will offer music from the five major recording labels -- virtually all of the music heard on commercial radio -- as streams and downloads.
Moviefly is slated to sell access to films released in theaters. 
Those initiatives only offer digital entertainment in one format -- either audio or video.
But RealNetworks will offer a mix of music, radio, television and movie highlights with its new RealOne service. 
For a monthly fee, users can get live radio broadcasts of all Major League Baseball and National Basketball Association games, online video highlights of NBA games and sneak peeks and behind-the-scenes footage of television programming. 
Despite the slowing broadband growth, much of the audio content can be accessed with a dial-up modem without a noticeable drop off in service, said Scott Ehrlich, RealNetwork's vice president of programming.
So, he said, consumers can experience shows according to their connection speed. 
The first iteration of the service -- the Real GoldPass -- has already drawn 400,000 subscribers, each paying $10 per month. 
"One of the issues with broadband is that it isn't worth a certain amount of money per month to get text faster," Ehrlich said.
"One of the things that we want to do with RealOne is provide a reason for people to upgrade their connections." 
The Universal Music Group's digital incubator, eLabs, decided to forgo a subscription model for one of its products, instead launching The Viewing Lounge video service that uses repurposed television commercials as its revenue stream. 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
Nortel Networks, which has taken a severe beating in the telecom market downturn, reported an expected yet nevertheless astounding loss of $19.4 billion in its second quarter. 
For the other big name on the earnings calendar -- Sun Microsystems -- the picture was a little rosier.
The company reported a profit, albeit a much smaller one than a year ago. 
Rounding out the afternoon were computer maker Gateway, which posted a loss; and online auctioneer eBay, which posted a profitable quarter in spite of a slowing economy. 
meets its own forecasts: Microsoft reported earnings that were pretty much the same as it predicted a week ago. 
For the three-month period ending June 30, Microsoft reported a net income of $66 million, or 1 cent a share.
The quarterly profit would have been far greater had it not been for the sharp decline in value -- to the tune of $2.6 billion -- of Microsoft's investment portfolio. 
The company reported quarterly revenue of $6.58 billion, up from $5.8 billion in the same period last year.
Its operating income was $2.75 billion. 
Microsoft ( MSFT ) said it expects to earn between $6 billion and $6.2 billion in revenue in the current quarter, which ends Sept. 30.
It said it expects to report earnings per share of between 39 cents and 40 cents. 
Another huge loss for Nortel:
Nortel Networks lived up to an earlier warning, delivering a huge second-quarter loss of $19.4 billion amid declining revenues.
It declined to give a new forecast. 
"While I am disappointed with our results for the second quarter, we have taken the right steps in this environment to strengthen Nortel Networks leadership position," said John Roth, Nortel's chief executive, in a statement. 
The telecommunications gear maker said net losses in the second quarter including charges, were $19.4 billion, or $6.08 a share, in line with a June 15 warning.
It is one of the largest corporate losses in history. 
Revenues in the quarter dropped to $4.61 billion, down from $7.21 billion in the same period last year, but above analyst estimates of $4.47 billion. 
Net losses from continuing operations for the second quarter were $1.55 billion, or 48 cents per common share, compared to net earnings of $637 million, or 21 per common share on a diluted basis, for the same period in 2000. 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
May 25, 2001
With flywheels spinning and pistons pumping, the opening credits for Secrets of Silicon Valley suggest a 1930's-style tract for workers' rights.
But this documentary steers clear of such single-mindedness.
By Manny Frishberg. 
May 21, 2001
This year's Electronic Entertainment Expo is all about high-profile videogame consoles that have been years in the making.
PC makers -- nowhere to be seen -- sniff that they'd never tolerate such slow release cycles.
Andy Patrizio reports from in Los Angeles. 
May 17, 2001 Big game hunters Microsoft, Nintendo and Sony introduce their latest wares, all expected to be in the stores before Christmas.
Andy Patrizio reports from the Electronic Entertainment Expo in Los Angeles. 
May 16, 2001
Some of the film industry's prominent special-effects talent tell a Cannes Film Festival panel that if the story's no good, their own work is for naught.
Ron Dicker reports from Cannes. 
May 9, 2001
The website that was going to revolutionize the way sports fans interacted with the sporting world's greatest event is kaput.
Salt Lake says: "Let the Games be HTMLed."
By Farhad Manjoo. 
May 7, 2001
The Internet's role as a major content distributor played a big part in the settlement between Hollywood talent and management. 
May 5, 2001 Animated film
Foodfight!
stars product pitchmen
Twinkie the Kid and Mr. Clean in a supermarket story.
Consumer advocates worry that it's a big commercial with only a smattering of plot.
By Robin Clewley. 
May 1, 2001
A panel of judges, hearing the appeal of the high-profile DVD-descrambling case, don't seem to buy into the defense's First Amendment arguments.
Declan McCullagh reports from New York.
"Oftentimes, the longer the document, the more messed up the business," wrote Steve Milunovich, Merrill Lynch's global technology strategist, in a study released Tuesday. 
He found that companies with long annual reports, known as 10Ks, often used the space for detailed explanations of write-offs and other unusual items that dragged down earnings. 
To carry out the research, Milunovich compared the file sizes of annual reports submitted by companies in the Merrill Lynch 100 technology stock index.
He then compared that data to the performance of the stock in their most recent fiscal year. 
The findings?
The study concluded that 83 percent of companies with the shorter annual reports (those occupying less than 300 KB of file space) outperformed the index. 
On average, stocks of companies in the under-300 KB group, which included Adobe Systems ( ADBE ), Sungard Data Systems ( SDS ) and Unisys Corp. ( UIS ), declined by 52 percent in their most recent fiscal year.
Although they didn't exactly do well, the group's performance was above average for firms in the index, which took a beating in 2000. 
Companies with long annual reports (over 500 KB), on the other hand, sported an average decline of 77 percent in their most recent fiscal year.
Only 18 percent of companies in that category, which included underperformers Lucent Technologies ( LU ), Nortel Networks ( NT ) and Brocade Communications ( BRCD ), outperformed the index. 
Researchers advised that the results be taken with a grain of salt.
Often there are other factors besides complicated explanations of losses that can account for a lengthy annual report.
In the case of AOL-Time Warner, for example, myriad pages were required to explain the process of merging the Internet and media behemoths. 
Also, there are exceptions to the generalization that long reports signify poor performance, and vice versa.
Cadence Design Systems ( CDN ), for example, filed a 508 KB annual report and only saw its stock drop 10.4 percent in fiscal 2000.
Foundry Networks ( FDRY ), which filed a 245 KB report, saw its stock plummet 94.8 percent. 
Even so, Milunovich believes there's a lesson to be learned in all this Kilobyte-counting.
Investors, he said, should beware of annual reports with too many footnotes.
It's not that all footnotes are bad, he said, but in general, the longer the annual report, the more complicated the business is, and the more issues that need to be explained. 
Merrill Lynch cautioned, however, that the experiment was "less than scientific."
Only 48 of the 100 companies in the index were included in the study.
Others hadn't yet submitted annual reports, had irregular fiscal years, or were based outside the United States. 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
That, combined with the generally splendid special effects, is all that should be necessary to transfigure the movie into a magical success.
While the film may have cost an estimated $150 million, the hordes of Muggles and their offspring already queuing up to see it should make Harry Potter one of the most profitable movie franchises ever. 
Yet the price that director Chris Columbus and screenwriter Steve Kloves paid for their punctilious adherence to Rowling's Holy Writ is a movie almost as bulky as cake-swilling Dudley: It tilts the hourglass at 2 hours, 23 minutes. 
Because Columbus and Kloves strove to squeeze in nearly all the characters and scenes from the book -- and since three times the duration would be required to do it properly -- the result is a film that seems as hurried as that time-dilation spell that Hermione tests out a few years later.
We're teased with glimpses of Harry testing his wand, schoolboys cooing over the Nimbus 2000 and Nearly Headless Nick at the dinner table, but we never learn how those episodes fit into Harry's life. 
Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone begins with a dark glimpse into Harry's sad life with his aunt, uncle and cousin Dudley on Privet Drive in suburban England.
As Rowlings put it : "Perhaps it had something to do with living in a dark cupboard, but Harry had always been small and skinny for his age....
Harry had a thin face, knobbly knees, black hair and bright green eyes.
He wore round glasses held together with a lot of Scotch tape because of all the times Dudley had punched him on the nose." 
Luckily for both us and Harry, with the help of Hagrid (Robbie Coltrane), he escapes the world of Muggledom and is magically transported to the Hogwarts school for wizards.
En route he meets Hermione Granger (Emma Watson) and Ron Weasley (Rupert Grint), who become his best friends and co-conspirators. 
For Harry soon finds out that hidden in the Hogwarts castle, a massive building with shifting staircases, ghosts and talking paintings, is a magical artifact called the sorcerer's stone.
It's being guarded by a three-headed brute whelped from Cerberus, and Voldemort -- a wraithlike figure who murdered Harry's parents -- believes the stone will bring his powers back. 
The casting is excellent.
It's now difficult to imagine the snide Draco Malfoy looking like anything but a bleached-blond Boris Karloff.
Albus Dumbledore (Richard Harris) and Professor McGonagall (Maggie Smith) are equally well cast. 
Adults who love the Harry Potter novels -- which are hardly loved by only children -- might find the movie rendition occasionally juvenile.
Hagrid's slips are a bit too contrived, and the Quidditch match is as forgettable as that pod race in Star Wars: Episode I. 
Movies should be rated by how much the experience is worth.
Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone is worth $15 if you're a fan of the series, and half that otherwise. 
Have a comment on this article?
<a href="mailto:
newsfeedback@wired.com?subject= Potter Fans Should Love the Film" target=top>Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
Spertus won her dubious honor as the second-ever Sexiest Geek Alive after beating out seven other regional finalists in a pageant that felt, at times, like a conference of (very) minor celebrities. 
Chase Masterson , a supporting star of the TV show Star Trek:
Deep Space Nine, hosted the show with help from Martin Sargent , a TechTV anchor.
Jennifer Glover , Miss California USA, presented the Sex Geek's crown. 
And there were reporters from all over the country who had gathered to get a wacky story for the readers back home. 
"There's more press than crowd here," said Steven Phenix, who founded the contest last year as a publicity stunt meant to parody People magazine's Sexiest Man Alive issue. 
He was right.
Discounting the finalists' friends and family, very few "real people" came to see the geek contest, which left little doubt that this thing, though it's received much media attention, is little more than a carny sideshow in our vast pop cultural landscape. 
Even though some of the geeks here tried to say something different, the truth is that geeks aren't sex symbols.
They're smart people whose talents have nothing to do with looks and social skills and popularity -- and Spertus won because she didn't try to pretend otherwise. 
When the judges asked her to recall her proudest moment, she told just about the geekiest anecdote of the pageant: She received a piece of spam from Kozmo.com and, annoyed that the message was sent to her even though she had told the company not to mail her, Spertus sued the company in small-claims court. 
"And I won," she declared, to great cheers from the crowd. 
Spertus is a small woman and though she has a very commanding voice, she always looked slightly shaken as she addressed the crowd -- and this effect added volumes to her geekiness. "
Kozmo is now out of business," she added, "so let that be a lesson to spammers." 
The other geeks, generous with their references to Linux and Star Wars, seemed fake beside her.
They only talked computers, while Spertus, with her three degrees from MIT and her electric car and her circuit board-shaped corset, seemed to eat, drink and breathe machines. 
For the "talent" portion, Spertus showed a five-minute biographical video she'd whipped up for the pageant.
With the MIDI-version of "Girls Just Wanna Have Fun" as a soundtrack, the film followed Spertus' life from her early days at computer camp to her current job at Mills College where, she says, she "produces" geeks every year by teaching them computers.
And since she's producing so many geeks, she's a kind of geek fertility goddess -- which is very sexy, she insisted. 
And now that she's officially the sexiest geek, Spertus said she wants to help produce even more geeks, especially geeky women.
Besides teaching at Mills (a women's college), Spertus also often speaks at elementary and junior high schools in her area, and she said she might step up those efforts. 
"Though I don't know whether I'll mention this title of mine to the 14-year-old girls," she said.
"I'm not sure whether they'll take it as a plus or a minus." 
Farhad Manjoo was a judge for the Sexiest Geek Alive contest. 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version. 
Copyright 2001 Wired Digital Inc., a Lycos Network site.
All rights reserved.
A Canadian cancer researcher may have done a drug company in Brussels, as well as smokers, a huge favor.
Dr. Stephen Lam, director of the lung cancer prevention program at the British Columbia Cancer Research Center in Vancouver, British Columbia, found that one of Solvay 's drugs, marketed as Sialor or Sulfarlem, also significantly reduces the spread of lung-cancer tumors.
The drug is now used to treat dry mouth.
Lung cancer kills more people worldwide than any other type of cancer.
The chances of developing lung cancer are reduced every year after a smoker quits.
But the risk doesn't go away completely, and 50 percent of lung cancer patients are former smokers.
Lam, who announced his findings at the American Association for Cancer Research annual meeting, hopes this drug might prevent former smokers and maybe even current smokers from developing lung cancer.
"Other clinical trials are warranted immediately," said Frank Rauscher , a professor and chair of the molecular genetics program at the University of Pennsylvania.
The billion-dollar question is, who will pay for more clinical trials?
Lam's study was paid for with grants from the National Cancer Institute , and the money has run out.
The final stage of clinical trials can cost hundreds of millions of dollars.
But the rewards could be worth it for whoever decides to take on the task.
Lung cancer causes more than 150,000 deaths in the United States every year, and 80 percent are due to smoking.
Solvay has not yet decided whether it will sponsor further trials, Lam said.
The drug comes in pill form, which was taken three times a day in the study, and has minimal side effects -- mainly gas and bloating.
Since the drug is already approved in Canada and Europe, oncologists there are free to prescribe Sialor for lung cancer treatment -- a practice known as off-label use.
As long as the drug is deemed safe by a regulatory agency, doctors can use it as they see fit.
But in the United States, the drug is not approved -- so if Solvay wants to sell it here, it will have to sponsor a much larger study and then submit the data to the Food and Drug Administration for approval.
Paladin, a Canadian drug company, acquired distribution rights to the drug in 1998.
Neither Solvay nor Paladin could be reached for comment.
Lam's study completed the second phase of trials necessary for the FDA's consideration.
Over six months, 101 smokers and former smokers took the dry-mouth drug.
It reduced the progression of their lung cancer tumors by an average of 22 percent.
To participate in the study, the smokers had to have smoked at least a pack a day for 30 years, or two packs a day for 15 years.
Those who took a placebo had 53 percent more new lesions or lesions that got worse than those who took the drug.
One-third of the participants had quit smoking, and Lam said the treatment worked better for those patients than for the current smokers. 
Printing?
Use this version.
Technology is a counterfeiter's dream-come-true, but the Feds are catching on and imposing stiffer penalties for those caught handing out wooden nickels.
Also: X-Box is coming, but fans will have to wait until November to get it ... and more in today's compression of technology news. 
Need an MP3 player?
Wired News recommends Sonique -- not because we have the same parent company, but because we like the people who make it. 
Mac users and people who just want to try something new can look at this list of platform-specific audio players.
Nov. 20, 2000 Oakland-based Talking Drum opens a store of cell phones for teenagers.
Also : Bluetooth products are finally shipping...
Sprint unveils a wireless music service...
Juicy telecom tidbits in this week's wireless notebook.
By Elisa Batista. 
Nov. 6, 2000
The Supreme Court had a hand in two technology-related cases, one dealing with local control over cellular antennas, and another concerning the rights of online journalists. 
Nov. 2, 2000
A British consumer group says its research shows that hands-free earpieces could more than triple the brain's exposure to radiation compared to a conventional mobile-phone call.
Mobile-phone manufacturers want more proof.
Yahoo ( YHOO ), long known for its youthful management team, breakneck rate of growth and steep stock appreciation, has more recently felt the pain of an economic downturn as well as a scattered strategy that was not always focused on the bottom line. 
Yahoo's shares hit an all-time high of $216.34 in January 2000, but like other Internet shares they have taken the dot-com plunge and at Thursday's close they stood at $14.83 -- well above their 12-month low of $8.02 but way off their year-high of $60. 
The company said it will actually cut 400 jobs, but it will continue to hire people to build up key business areas.
It expects the net job reduction to be about 300.
Most of the jobs being cut, it said, will come out of its international and broadcast divisions, and from middle management. 
Thursday's meeting was the first time that Terry Semel, Yahoo's Chief Executive of the past seven months, has outlined a broad plan to turn things around. 
Referring to the company's old strategy to "get big fast by providing a broad set of Web services," Semel remarked, "That couldn't possibly be the strategy going forward." 
Specifically, he said that while Yahoo will continue to focus on selling advertising to support its site, it will move to achieve more of a 50-50 balance between advertising revenues and those generated from fees on business and consumer services.
Advertising, which is expected to account for 76 percent of total company revenues this year, should come down to 50 to 60 percent of the mix by 2004, Semel said. 
Another major prong of the new strategy involves collecting money from more of the 210 million people who regularly visit Yahoo.
Semel said he hoped, within a "reasonable" time period, to achieve "a direct billing relationship" -- through subscriptions and other fee-based services -- with some 10 million of Yahoo's users.
He gave no specific time target for that goal. 
During the all-day meeting, various Yahoo executives filled in more of the details of the turnaround strategy.
As part of a previously announced plan to eliminate fluff from the site, Yahoo said it would cut some lifestyle, small business and business-to-business marketplace features. 
It is also scaling back its focus on online greetings and local content by pursing partnerships with other companies. 
The company also devoted considerable time to explaining how it thought it could grow its advertising and marketing business, by offering a broader set of products that went beyond plain banner ads and took advantage of all the consumer data it had collected. 
But beyond the specific business plans announced there was a broader sense that Yahoo was striving to change its culture.
Thursday's event was marked by more gray haired executives, who displayed an uncharacteristic humility and acknowledged that the company's problems would need to be addressed at the roots. 
Wenda Millard, the recently appointed Chief Advertising Sales Officer, even offered an "in" and "out" list.
In a reference to some criticism that the company had been arrogant and unresponsive to business partners she said that cooperative relationships were in and the "my way or the highway" attitude was out.
Willard said the customer was in and arrogance was out. 
In stark contrast to Yahoo's early days as a startup founded by two young graduate students, maturity is apparently also in.
Greg Coleman, Yahoo's executive vice president who is actively involved in building more marketing and advertising partnerships said, "You can't do it with youth and enthusiasm." 
Coleman said that the company had recently hired 30 new ad sales people, who were for the most part 40- or 50- something and had years of experience and established contacts with the major ad agencies. 
"It makes you sleep well at night," he said. 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
Oct. 29, 1999 Los Angeles parents can now go to the Web for easy access to the information they need to evaluate and choose a school for their kids.
Andrew Rice reports from Los Angeles. 
Oct. 27, 1999 Generation Y is the hottest online market segment of the future.
But that doesn't mean it's easy to get kids and teens to your e-commerce site.
By Lakshmi Chaudhry. 
Oct. 25, 1999
The Media Lab and the toy company plan a center where researchers can put technology into the hands of inquisitive children.
Jill Priluck reports from Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
Oct. 25, 1999 MindFest celebrates the creativity unleashed by a new generation of computerized construction kits.
Kids and adult hobbyists toy with ideas at MIT's Media Lab.
Jill Priluck reports from Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
Oct. 22, 1999 Las Vegas' big convention just got bigger by two:
The teenage founders of a Web-hosting company will be allowed to attend after all.
By Craig Bicknell. 
Oct. 21, 1999
The founder of a successful Web-hosting company wants to drum up more business at next month's tech schmoozefest in Vegas.
But at 17, he's under the age limit.
By Craig Bicknell. 
Oct. 20, 1999
If Web sites want to collect personal information on children, they'll have to go through the parents first.
This, of course, raises new concerns.
Declan McCullagh reports from Washington.
Chris Ferrantello, a professional illustrator who has worked for Esquire and The New York Times, is an example of how digital tools, and in particular Macromedia's Flash format, encourage DIY animation.
His Twin Killings, a meditation on the Sept. 11 attacks, is featured at the Sundance Online Fest. 
"Twenty years ago, I was interested in animation, but didn't think I'd have a chance," Ferrantello said.
"You needed real equipment.
But once I got a computer and got my hands on (Flash), I was able to recycle my illustrations and make them move." 
Ferrantello's movie represents another new trend in animation -- the ability to create and exhibit topical works (a scan of ifilm 's most popular animations includes Osama been Flatten and Harry Pothead and the Magical Herb ).
Artists also are making cartoons that would scandalize the average Nickelodeon- or Disney-fed animation consumer. 
"The Internet has functioned to produce a new kind of audience that accepts a less polished look in exchange for more interesting and provocative content," Marina Zurkow said.
Her animated series Brain Girl, showcased at Sundance, was too racy for MTV, which showed a clip but cropped out part of her title character. 
"I don't want to be ghettoized as an animator -- I'm a filmmaker who uses animation tools to tell stories," Zurkow said.
"I wanted to tell stories in a way I can afford ... it made a lot of sense to break out of the real-world constraints of traditional filmmaking." 
"Anyone can now shoot live action with digital cameras and bring it to their home computer to edit," said Motomichi Nakamura, whose music video "Add Boiling Water" is up at the Sundance site.
"The same is becoming true with animation -- the tools have become very handy." 
The best of times for Web-based animation may have been a couple of years ago, before the collapse of the Internet entertainment industry.
Still, digital animators are heartened by the success of Waking Life , the independently produced animated feature that opened this fall. 
Could the advent of digital tools turn animation into a more significant component of independent cinema?
Will young filmmakers swap their cameras for Flash?
Jesse Jacobs, vice president of content for ifilm and author of a forthcoming history of the Internet, is skeptical. 
"Either you are an animation guy or you aren't," he said.
"It's a different artistic temperament -- you'll either use live action or you won't....
Live action will always have more appeal and attraction with mass audiences.
" 
But Sundance programmer Trevor Groth, who curated the Online Fest, believes digital animation could revitalize cinema.
He recently visited an animation studio and was struck by the relative ease of making 21st-century cartoons. 
"Seeing what can be done with digital tools, compared to what animators used to have to do with celluloid, makes it clear that the technologies are changing everything," he said.
"I think more and more people will turn to the new animation tools to tell stories in different ways." 
Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
Nov. 15, 1999 Online music execs are already buzzing about this year's Webnoize music event.
Veterans are returning flush with cash, and startups will surely be vying for attention.
By Jennifer Sullivan. 
Nov. 13, 1999
After the RIAA comes calling, the University of South Carolina begins monitoring the school network for suspicious download activity.
By Kristen Philipkoski. 
Nov. 12, 1999 Bit by bit, manufacturers are implementing security features that will meet the proposed requirements of the record industry's SDMI initiative.
By Christopher Jones. 
Nov. 10, 1999 New software tackles the problematic task of securing downloadable digital music for use in portable players.
Crackers have thwarted previous efforts at protecting content. 
Nov. 10, 1999 Streambox releases software that "repurposes" RealNetworks content so users can avoid that nasty encryption and take their favorite music streams anywhere.
By Christopher Jones. 
Nov. 9, 1999 Dozens of Carnegie Mellon University students lose their Internet privileges after school officials do a random search for illegal MP3 files.
Music industry threats prompted the bust.
By Kristen Philipkoski. 
Nov. 6, 1999 RealNetworks posts an updated RealPlayer to remove personal tracking code.
A week ago, the company addressed related concerns with its RealJukebox software.
By Chris Oakes and Jennifer Sullivan. 
Nov. 5, 1999 You've got an MP3 player on your computer, and maybe you've tested portable waters, too.
All you need is an MP3 home stereo deck.
A Wired News review by Christopher Jones. 
Nov. 4, 1999
The supposed hacker-proof DVD security system was easily broken by Linux users who couldn't watch movies on their systems.
Andy Patrizio, who broke the story, offers suggestions about what the movie industry should do next. 
Nov. 3, 1999 Online music shops such as RealNetworks are no different from other retailers in wanting your demographic data.
After all, big bucks are at stake.
By Jennifer Sullivan and Christopher Jones. 
Nov. 2, 1999
The online grocer's initial public offering, delayed in October, is expected to proceed Wednesday.
Also: Barnes & Noble buys a chunk of iUniverse.com....
Replay Networks unveils new personal video recorder....
Beatnik Inc., Mixman Technologies in merger. 
Nov. 1, 1999 Privacy group Truste promises to investigate the Net music company for tracking individuals' listening habits.
The company will issue a software patch, but privacy advocates call for government participation.
By Leander Kahney. 
Nov. 1, 1999 New software allows users to chat about their favorite music and swap MP3 files.
Isn't this the way the Net's supposed to work?
Not everybody thinks so.
By Jennifer Sullivan.
Since it was a bad year, we'll start with the bad news. 
What were some of the disappointments or overrated issues in 2001? 
John Feldcamp, CEO of Xlibris.com: "2001 has not been about innovation, but about general devastation and retrenchment.
In this new and very Darwinian world, the first crop of new publishing related companies has been massively selected for extinction and most real innovation will need to wait for a few more years." 
Laurie Rippon, a senior vice president at HarperCollins Publishers: "Obviously e-books (at some houses) were over-hyped, over-staffed and the accompanying 'death of the e-book' news is overreaction.
The sad thing is that overblown expectations of a dot-com revolution and the idea that technology can conquer all, combined with a recession and a newly subdued country veering towards conservatism and fear, make it hard to continue the optimism and creativity that force us to change habits and grow towards something new." 
Linda Richards, editor of January Magazine : "I know a lot of people were disappointed that e-books didn't get the leg up
it looked like they were going to get in 2001.
But, it strikes me that e-books now are at the place, professionally, where the Internet was in 2000: The publishing industry has discovered that e-books aren't going to be a panacea.
But this was a necessary discovery.
After that initial disappointment, you start building a solid foundation based on logical evolution and the only place to go is up." 
Cynthia Orr, librarian and co-founder of BookBrowser.com : "That the major publishers still can't see that working with librarians or distributors to figure out how to let libraries purchase or license their e-books, and let readers 'check them out' for free, would help build a market that otherwise threatens to just collapse for lack of interest.
Librarians have been careful defenders of copyright over the years ... and our budgets are far higher than they realize." 
David Eide, editor of Oasis 2001 : "That there wasn't a bigger migration of talent from print to e-publishing.
Obviously, this is connected to the very low sales of e-books and lack of capital.
It proved to me that e-publishing is going to be digging in hardscrabble for awhile."
Mark Gross, president of Data Conversion Laboratory : "That the major e-book ventures are closing down -- or really slowing down.
My reading is that, in fact, they've now realized that e-publishing is really just publishing, and it's counterproductive to have a separate competing company to develop electronic books." 
What was the best news of the last 12 months? 
Michael S. Hart, director of Project Gutenberg : "The number of e-books available for free download on the Net will pass 20,000.
The number of Net users will start heading towards 1 billion." 
Marjorie Coverley Luesebrink, author, college professor and board member of the Electronic Literature: "The growing tendency for online zines and journals to begin publishing hypertext in 2001.
Since writers have always depended on the network of little magazines to build an audience and establish a publication base, the growing strength of the online zines represents a valuable resource for writers and a new source of material for publishers." 
Diane Greco, president of Eastgate.com : "
The Lite Show, a project of Boston Cyberarts, featured low-bandwidth Web animation and motion graphics.
The most interesting thing about this juried exhibition was how these artists rose to the unique challenge of using bandwidth as an artistic constraint." 
Mark Gross, president of Data Conversion Laboratory : "What people forget is e-books were going strong before they were called e-books and they went on to sweep into many aspects of business and publishing.
Most of this has gone unnoticed by the media.
Probably because it has been a kind of backdoor revolution.
To cite one example: Print law books are just about gone.
People don't use them in law firms anymore.
It's all electronic books or online.
A revolution has occurred, but no one's noticed.
" Have a comment on this article?
Send it . 
Printing?
Use this version.
